IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                         26
    NEW FOES
    The foes of the Firelands are as varied as the cultures of the Firelands. You
    may find yourself pitted against animals, beasts, horrors, and even other
    Firelanders. Steel yourself, for these foes lack not for strength or wit.
    As mentioned earlier, these foes were taken from many different time
    periods of myths in Japanese history. As such, they normally would not all
    be found together, but I've endeavored to make them all fit into the world
    of the Firelands coherently.
    Additionally, these foes are not the exact same as their namesakes, but that
    was the starting place for creating a foe that fit the Ironsworn system and
    Firelands setting. For example, some foes take their name from yokai or
    other more powerful beings but have been adjusted into fantasy animals or
    beasts to round out the types of foes you can encounter.
27            THE FIRELANDS | BASED ON JAPANESE MYTHOLOGY
BYAKKO                                                         ANIMAL
Rank:     Formidable (1 progress per harm; inflicts 3 harm)
            White or gray, striped coat
Features:   Agility and speed
            Mark of the king on their forehead
            Hunt
Drives:     Mate
            Roam their territory
            Silently stalk prey from within the gray grasses
Tactics:    Pounce, bite, and rend
            Make a show of dominance
The gray tigers of the Hai No Kawa grasslands are said to be descended
from the Great White Tiger, Byakko himself. As such, we have taken to
calling them by that name and give these tigers the respect they deserve and
demand with their deadly skills.
The tigers make their dens in sink holes or ancient lava tubes within the
ground. Sometimes the tigers need not hunt because their prey falls into
their den by taking a careless step forward without checking the ground
ahead first. You have heard the phrase, "Look before you leap," but in the
Hai No Kawa we say, "Search before you step."
The byakko have superb senses of sight, smell, and hearing that allow them
to pinpoint prey within the grasses ahead. They then leap forward and
pounce atop the back of their prey in an effort to snap their neck. If that
doesn't lead to an instant kill, they bite the prey on the neck to hold them
in place while their sharp claws rake and rend.
Quest: A strange shaman with a byakko cloak claims to be able to traverse
the Hai No Kawa without being accosted by the tigers. Wherever the
shaman goes, the byakko are mysteriously absent. How did the shaman
come by such knowledge, and where do you need the shaman to take you
that no one else has been able to find?
YOUR TRUTH
Do the byakko tigers have any supernatural abilities that were
passed on to them by the Great White Tiger? If so, what are
they?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                       28
    ISONADE                                                             ANIMAL
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2         harm)
                Large shark with hooked tail
    Features:   Serrated teeth
                Impossibly fast
    Drives:     Hunt
                Follow storms
                Drag prey underwater with tail hooks
    Tactics:    Bite
                Cut small boats in half
    Crossing the sea from the Old World to the Firelands was a battle we
    thought unwinnable. The distance we needed to sail was unknown, fresh
    water and food supplies were scant, and we were hunted by the isonade.
    The isonade are sharks nearly the size of a longboat whose tail is covered
    with several bony hooks with barbed ends. They use the hooks to snag
    their prey and drag them underwater rapidly changing depths so that the
    prey passes out. Once they free their prey from their tails, they feast with
    a frenzy so that no other fish can benefit from their kill.
    During our crossing, the isonade would lash their tails over the sides of the
    ship to hook us and drag us from our vessels. Failing that, two would work
    in concert to latch their tails onto the side of our ships and split the bow in
    twain. As a whole ship would begin floundering, we could do nothing but
    watch and listen in horror as our family and friends were silenced one by
    one. It is said that the isonade developed a taste for our blood those long
    years ago and can now smell us when travel the seas.
    Quest: Within the Chisana Hi roams a legendary isonade known as the
    Hari Ken, the Hooked Sword. It has grown cartilage like a suit of armor
    and threatens all trade and travel in the area. Can this beast be stopped?
    YOUR TRUTH
    The isonade travel and attack most often during violent storms
    at sea. Do they hold some power to control or call the storms,
    or are they merely instinctively following the storms?
29               THE FIRELANDS | BASED ON JAPANESE MYTHOLOGY
KAMAITACHI                                                         ANIMAL
Rank:      Troublesome (3 progress per harm; inflicts  1  harm)
             Large weasel-like body
Features:    Bladed paws
             Numbing agent on blades
             Attacks males of other species
Drives:      Forage for food
             Defend territory
             Ride on whirlwinds
Tactics:     Knockdown and rake
             Slash ankles to numb feet of victim
Upon arriving in the Firelands, one of the first creatures we noticed was the
kamaitachi, an usual weasel with bony blades instead of paws. These
creatures run circles around their prey slashing as they go. The blades have
a secretion on them that act as a numbing or paralyzing agent that is
particularly effective against the small to medium animals that the
carnivorous creatures hunt.
When they attack, kamaitachi have been known to move so fast as to stir
up tiny dust devils which is where the story of riding on whirlwinds came
from. As far as we can tell, they hold no true mystical power over the air,
but they can propel themselves at great speed and even spin their bodies
about balancing on one blade while slashing with the other three.
The creatures are also very territorial particularly when it comes to mating.
The male kamaitachi are known to attack males of almost any other
mammalian species including Firelanders.
Quest: A storied ronin is hunting kamaitachi to create tekko-kagi claws
from their blades, but the locals know that the creatures are merely part of
the ecosystem and don't want to offend the kami or stir up any yokai. Can
the ronin's quest be stopped in a manner that is agreeable to all sides?
YOUR TRUTH
Are kamaitachi supernatural creatures or animals of unusual
heritage?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                        30
    JOROGUMO                                                             BEAST
    Rank:          Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
                     Giant spiders who begin prowling at 400 years old
    Features:        Can mimic human sounds with human-like face
                     Orb weaver with large spiraling webs
                     Gorge themselves on prey
    Drives:          Stay hidden unless necessary
                     Build larger and larger webs for better hunting
                     Cry out for help to lure in prey
    Tactics:         Release a blood-curdling scream
                     Trap in web and bite with poison
    The jorogumo spiders are as large as harrow spiders but much stranger. As
    near as we can tell, the first several hundred years of a jorogumo's life is
    spent inside a cocoon webbed so tightly that it may as well be armor of the
    thickest iron, but somehow it keeps expanding. Once the giant spiders
    break free, their abdomens are warped and twisted with age, their heads
    have the look of a maiden's head only misshapen, and their chelicerea
    (fangs) begin rubbing together making the scream of a demon.
    As these spiders gain more experience outside of their cocoons, they can
    rub their fangs in such a way as to mimic basic sounds. Many miners have
    lost their lives delving to find what sounds like a lost comrade only to come
    face to face with a jorogumo.
    Once they escape the deep places of the world, they move into thick woods
    and spin web after web in huge spiral patterns. Some of the largest webs
    when viewed from a distant hilltop resemble a giant sea shell spiraling ever
    outward.
    Quest: An ancient jorogumo has taken a great warrior captive but is not
    feasting on the flesh. Instead, the warriors screams and cries for help can
    be heard for miles. The speech is too intelligible to be the spider mimicking
    the sounds. Who is this warrior to you, and why would you risk your life
    to save them?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Some say the first jorogumo was truly a woman cursed by a
    powerful mystic. Who believes this is true and what are they
    doing to try to reverse the curse?
31                    THE FIRELANDS | BASED ON JAPANESE MYTHOLOGY
NURE       ONNA                                                    BEAST
Rank:      Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
             Giant snake with the girth of a human
Features:    Feminine human-like face
             Arm-like appendages just below the jaw
             Feast on human flesh
Drives:      Defend its territory
             Sun on giant rocks
             Surprise strike from hiding
Tactics:     Blend in with driftwood
             Paralyzing bite
On the coasts of Kokuyoseki No Ha, vampiric sea serpents lie in wait
among the obsidian shards for unsuspecting Firelanders to feast upon. But
these aren't normal sea serpents. Like the jorogumo, these creatures have
a vaguely feminine humanoid face, but their mouth is lined with fangs that
they use to drain the blood from victims.
Worse yet there are two varieties of nure onna, and the second kind has
fledgling arm-like appendages just below its jaw that it uses to hold down
its prey. Both varieties have muddy brown colored scales and are excellent
swimmers.
Quest: The merchant ship Hi Uku was shipwrecked on one of the Chisana
Hi islands, and the vessel carried the local daimyo's spouse as well as
goods needed for survival. Unfortunately, the vessel ran aground in an
area known to be infested with nure onna. If the passengers survived the
sea snakes, the volcano would be the next immediate danger. Who or what
else was on the ship that makes you want to help with the rescue?
YOUR TRUTH
Are the nure onna faces truly human?       If so, how did this
amalgamation of a beast come about?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                     32
    KAPPA                                                       FIRSTBORN
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
                       Turtle-like humanoid
    Features:          Short and scaly with beak mouths
                       Indentation on top of their heads that holds magic water
                       Trap souls in gems
    Drives:            Drink the blood of victims
                       Eat cucumbers
                       Drown victims underwater
    Tactics:           Pounce and claw
                       Retreat from powerful foes
    The people known as the Kappa are reptilian humanoids with a penchant
    for mischief and murder. They live in bogs and swamps using the
    landscape to their advantage when hunting Firelanders. Their claws are
    sharp as well as their beaks making them fierce fighters, particularly when
    they are cornered.
    The Kappa also have some innate waterbending powers that we think
    stems from the water inside the depression at the top of their skull. Once
    they have drained blood from a victim, they then use a dark ritual to force
    the person's soul into a tiny gem that they let soak in their head water.
    There are three ways to defeat the Kappa. First, travel in large groups as
    they readily retreat from a battle they know they will lose. Second, trick
    them into dumping out the water on their head causing them to freeze in
    place until the water naturally refills. Third, believe it or not, throw them
    a cucumber. They can't resist them.
    Quest: A survivor of a Kappa attack was found with only minimal amounts
    of blood drained, but they are completely unresponsive leading the local
    mystic to believe their soul has already been trapped inside the Kappa's
    gem. Who is this person to you that you would undertake the quest to find
    their soul and return it to their body?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Do the Kappa live in large communities, or are they a solitary
    people?
    What do the Kappa use their soul gems for?
33                      THE FIRELANDS | BASED ON JAPANESE MYTHOLOGY
KITSUNE                                                     FIRSTBORN
Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
            Fox-like humanoid
Features:   Up to nine tails
            Clever, magical shapechangers
            Act as a messenger of primordial gods
Drives:     Play clever tricks
            Protect the plains and woods
            Run away in fox form
Tactics:    Use tails in battle
            Trip and pounce
Running into the Kitsune people is considered a sign of good fortune.
They rarely involve themselves in the affairs of Firelanders unless we
threaten their homelands in some way. More often we encounter them as
we find ourselves the object of their practical jokes. They are not malicious
in any way, but they do enjoy a good laugh at someone else's expense.
The Kitsune also have the ability to change shape from their humanoid
form to a fully fox form. We believe there is a correlation between how
many tails they have and how powerful their magic is. Not only do their
tails tie into their magic, but they also use them when fighting in their
humanoid form to pummel and confuse their foe.
We don't know much about the religion of the Kitsune people other than to
know that they take it very seriously. There is a deep spiritual connection
between the Kitsune and the plains and woods of the Firelands. Stories
abound of Firelanders catching fleeting glimpses of elaborate Kitsune
ceremonies before they fall asleep as if by magic. And magic it surely is
because every witness also claims to see the Kitsune's tails begin dancing
in arcane gestures before they fall asleep.
Quest: A Kitsune stood outside of a local settlement and demanded the
Firelanders stop planting so many crops as it was ruining the land. They
were reasonable knowing that the people need food, but insisted the farms
be scaled back. Why is brokering a peaceful solution here so important?
YOUR TRUTH
Do the Kitsune grow more tails as they age, as they gain
magical power, or are they born with a specific number of tails
that never changes?
Why is nine the maximum? What does the number represent?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                        34
    KODAMA                                                          FIRSTBORN
    Rank:     Troublesome (3 progress per harm;  inflicts  1  harm)
                Primordial tree spirit
    Features:   Appear as ghostly lights
                Act mostly on instinct
                Protect specific trees
    Drives:     Observe nature at work
                Drive out non-Firstborn
                Lead travelers astray
    Tactics:    Overwhelm with sadness
                Cannot be physically attacked
    If the Kodama truly are a people, they are unlike anything we've seen
    before. They primarily manifest as ghostly lights flickering in the distance
    to lead Firelanders away from their sacred spaces, but at times they
    manifest as vaguely humanoid with cloudy ovals for body and head along
    with cylindrical appendages.
    Our mystics have worked in concert with druids to divine what they can
    about the Kodama, and they believe the Kodama are either non-sentient or
    have some sort of collective consciousness shared between them. At first
    we thought they protected all the deep forests of the Firelands, but it seems
    more likely that they protect specific trees or groves. However, we don't
    know how they are assigned those trees or if they choose them.
    Travelers who have refused to follow the ghostly lights away from sacred
    spaces are quickly surrounded by the Kodama who then manifest more
    fully. In the presence of these more fully formed Kodama, our people
    report feeling overwhelming sadness and grief to the point that they
    willingly flee the area.
    Quest: A woodsperson from a local settlement went missing nearly a week
    ago and was just spotted in the middle of a ring of Kodama at the bottom
    of large hollow. The woodsperson is still alive but writhing and moaning
    in pain and grief. What relationship does this woodsperson have with one
    of your allies, friends, or companions that you are willing to attempt the
    quest to save them?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Are the Kodama sentient?      If so, is it an individual sentience or
    a collective one?
35               THE FIRELANDS | BASED ON JAPANESE MYTHOLOGY
TANUKI                                                   FIRSTBORN
Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts    2  harm)
            Raccoon dog humanoids
Features:   Can elongate appendages
            Tricksters and shapeshifters
            Cause mischief
Drives:     Enjoy a life of relative plenty
            Jokes at the expense of others
            Claw and bite
Tactics:    Enlarge body parts to smother foe
            Double hanbo strike
At first glance, the Tanuki people are similar to the Kitsune. From our
perspective, they are both animal-type people, they both can shapechange,
and they both love jokes. However, where the Kitsune have a positive
connotation, the Tanuki have a negative one. Without a guiding principle
like the Kitsune's religion, the Tanuki people have a society based more
around greed, gluttony, and guffaws.
The Tanuki also don't really shapechange but shapeshift. They can
elongate, or shift, their body parts like great sails of ships unfurling.
Perhaps as a consequence of their society or perhaps a consequence of
biology, the male Tanuki favor enlarging their scrotums to smother and
suffocate their foes. Needless to say, this is a humiliating way to die and
brings dishonor on the whole family and clan.
While their preference is to use their shapeshifting abilities, when faced
with a truly formidable foe, mostTanuki are skilled in the use of the hanbo,
a small wooden shaft slightly longer than a Firelanders forearm. Their
favorite victory celebration is drumming on the buttocks of a defeated foe.
Again, they enjoy bringing shame to others.
Quest: A group of Tanuki were floating down river on a boat of their own
elongated body part when they decided to enlarge their body parts even
more to block the path of the river. Now the water flows toward a low-lying
settlement. Can the river be restored to its normal course before its too
late? Who do you know that lives in this settlement?
YOUR TRUTH
What is the relationship between the Tanuki and the Kitsune
like? Apathetic? Oppositional? Affable?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                       36
    TENGU                                                              FIRSTBORN
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
                Avian humanoid
    Features:   Long red nose
                Corvid feathering (crow, raven, jay) over red skin
                Protect the mountains
    Drives:     Collect trinkets and treasure
                Keep outsiders away
                Clawed attacks from above
    Tactics:    Drop rocks on victims
                Flock together to overwhelm
    The Tengu people are avian in nature, but their bodies are not covered
    entirely in feathers. If it weren't for their red skin, wings, and comically
    long noses that may be an evolution from a beak, they could almost pass as
    a Firelander. Their feathering comes down from the top of their head to the
    back of their neck and shoulders before joining with their wings.
    Tengu are an ancient people who see it as their sacred duty to protect the
    mountains. As such, they dwell mainly in the Geppu Kyojin region and
    very much frown upon outsiders. They view us Firelanders as invaders and
    usurpers to the natural order. Miners and travelers are often met with a hail
    of arrows or rocks from above rather than a cordial greeting.
    One weakness or point of negotiation we can use with the Tengu is their
    love of treasure. Their self-imposed exile to the mountains limits their
    resources, so trade goods or items from the southern reaches of the
    Firelands are desirable gifts for them.
    Quest: A group of Tengu warriors have disrupted a mining camp just as
    they struck a vein of the precious nie iron. Is there any way to negotiate a
    truce, even if temporary, to be able to access the valuable ore?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Are the Tengu truly avian in nature, or are do they have more
    demonic origins?
37               THE FIRELANDS | BASED ON JAPANESE MYTHOLOGY
ONI                                                       FIRSTBORN
Rank:      Formidable (1 progress per harm;  inflicts  3  harm)
             Red skin and hulking body
Features:    Two horns and wild hair
             Wearing animal pelts
             Torment sinners
Drives:      Enact vicious schemes
             Act as mountain wardens
             Wield great iron clubs
Tactics:     Slash with sharp claws
             Bull rush using size
The Oni may or may not be related to the Tengu as they both have red skin
and protect the mountains, but the similarities stop there. Where the Tengu
view protecting the mountains as a sacred duty, the Oni seem to
accidentally protect mountain regions because they attack nearly anything
that gets close to them.
It said by our mystics that the Oni are either demons themselves or direct
descendants of demons. Their towering size and immense strength are
impressive enough, but some also have some rudimentary firebending
magic skill that seems to be evidence of their connection to their demonic
origins.
A rampaging Oni is nearly a death sentence for a group of traveling
Firelanders. They view all other life as subservient to them and even a
version of heresy that needs punished. They believe the greatest good they
can do is cause others to suffer.
Quest: One particular Oni in a nearby region is calmer and more
thoughtful than most. It does not attack randomly or without cause and
seems to be guarding some hidden treasure in a mountainous cave. What
item do you suspect to be in this cave system thought lost to time? Why are
you willing to risk the Oni's wrath to get it? Is this Oni truly an Oni at all?
YOUR TRUTH
What ultimate goal do the Oni have? Which organization has
dedicated themselves to stopping the Oni?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                          38
    HONE       ONNA                                                           HORROR
    Rank:      Troublesome (3 progress per harm;          inflicts  1  harm)
                 Skeletal remains of a lover
    Features:    Appears alive to former lover
                 Carries a paper lantern
                 Reunite with loved one
    Drives:      Kill competition for their love
                 Vanity
                 Life-draining kiss
    Tactics:     Scorch with ghostly lantern
                 Disheartening glare
    Perhaps one of the cruelest horrors of the Firelands is the hone onna. It is
    said that when one of a pair of soulmates dies before their time, one year
    from the date of their death they claw their way back out of the ground as
    a hone onna. Their only thought is to be reunited with their lost loved one.
    This story almost sounds heartwarming except that the hone onna are
    decayed and desiccated remains that slowly drain the life from their former
    lovers. Worse yet, the living soulmate sees the hone onna not as an
    animated corpse but as the love they remember best. They willingly fall
    into the arms of what they view as their loved one returned to them alive.
    Then over the course of days or weeks, they are slowly drained of their life
    and soul one kiss at a time.
    The only reliable way to be rid of a hone onna is to wait for their soulmate
    to die as well. However, that is not an acceptable solution, so we fight
    when we find them, but the hone onna fight back with fire magic that stems
    from their paper lanterns. Since they have physical bodies, a hone onna
    can be destroyed, but the living soulmate is rarely thankful as they would
    have preferred death in the arms of their loved one.
    Quest: A daimyo's daughter has returned as a hone onna, but the daimyo
    has forbidden anyone from striking the horror. The daimyo was disgraced
    when his daughter absconded with a lowly peasant's son and would rather
    see the son die than his daughter's ghostly remains harmed. The family of
    the boy has put out a call for help. How do you know this family, and why
    are you willing to help them?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Some remaining soulmates stand at their lover's grave on the
    one year anniversary in hopes of dying when they return as a
    hone onna. In what culture is this practice accepted?
39                THE FIRELANDS | BASED ON JAPANESE MYTHOLOGY
NUPPEPPO                                                           HORROR
Rank:     Troublesome (3 progress per harm; inflicts     1  harm)
            Blob creature that smells of death
Features:   Giant face for a body with stubby legs
            If its flesh is eaten, it may cure disease
            Dance in graveyards and temples
Drives:     Absorb more flesh
            Wander and dance mindlessly
            Jump on and smother
Tactics:    Overwhelm with smell
            Melt into the ground
Nuppeppo are in essence the left over fats and body fluids from the dead
congealed into a bulbous body that resembles a giant face. They are gross
and a mindless nuisance more than a true threat. If our mystics could
discover how they are created, we would do what we could as a
preventative measure much as we do with mice in the grain bin.
Particularly when the moon is in a specific phase, nuppeppo will ooze forth
from graves and congeal into bodies so that they may dance throughout the
night and continue to grow as they absorb more and more organic material.
We have taken to putting fences around our graveyards to keep the
nuppeppo in while they frolic the night away.
Some mystics believe that the "flesh" of a nuppeppo has curative
properties, but few are willing to test this hypothesis. Of the many strange
and horrible things in the Firelands, the nuppeppo are easy enough to
ignore and so, often are.
Quest: The site of a large battle has a mass grave that is now a place where
several nuppeppo appear nightly. However, these nuppeppo are much
more violent than normal. Someone you knew and cared about fell at this
battle. What secret did they take with them to the grave that you hope to
unravel by stopping these nuppeppo?
YOUR TRUTH
What causes some graveyards to have nuppeppo and others to
not? Is there a difference in the way the people died or the way
they were buried?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                       40
    NURIBOTOKE                                                       HORROR
    Rank:         Formidable (1 progress per harm; inflicts 3 harm)
                    Human torso and head with catfish tail
    Features:       Eyes dangling out of sockets
                    Chubby, bloated flesh that smells of death
                    Enter through thin places
    Drives:         Terrorize people
                    Give false prophesies
                    Project an aura of fear
    Tactics:        Wrestle and squeeze to death
                    Retreat to an ethereal realm
    The first nuribotoke showed up in the region of the Obsidian Blades coast,
    and we thought the near obsidian skin of these horrors was related to that.
    Alas, we were wrong as the nuribotoke have been spotted throughout the
    Firelands. They can enter the mortal realm through collective shrines left
    unattended or open cabinets of personal shrines within a home.
    The pungent odor is the first sign of the approaching nuribotoke usually
    followed by whispers of dark prophecies meant to plague the minds of
    Firelanders.     Once we are reduced to a pile of quivering fear, the
    nuribotoke reveal themselves fully with dangling eyeballs and flabby skin
    touching their scaly catfish tail. That's when they physically attack by
    squeezing with the might of a giant python.
    We don't know how nuribotoke are created nor their ultimate purpose, but
    as physical horrors, they can be killed if their fear can be resisted.
    However, once they see they may lose a fight, they begin frantically
    looking for a way back to the realm from whence they came.
    Quest: One particular shrine was cursed by a zealot to bring out
    nuribotoke every night, but the mystic caretaker of the shrine was able to
    enact a powerful counter ritual. As long as the shrine has at least a single
    lit candle, the nuribotoke can't get through. A tornado just ripped through
    the area, and the locals are afraid to check on the shrine. What else is
    housed at this shrine that you need?
    YOUR TRUTH
    What circumstance creates a nuribotoke?
41                   THE FIRELANDS | BASED ON JAPANESE MYTHOLOGY
OKIKU                                                          HORROR
Rank:      Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts  2  harm)
             Ghost of innocent murdered
Features:    Wailing of lack of guilt
             Uncontrollable sobbing
             Drive their killer mad
Drives:      Convince others of their innocence
             Torment other tormentors
             Induce madness
Tactics:     Phase through objects
             Ear-piercing blasts of sound
When an innocent person is tormented and then killed, there is a chance
that their spirit returns to the Firelands as a horror. The okiku horrors
would be sympathetic for this reason except for their penchant for visiting
torment on others. Usually an okiku will hunt down their own killer and
visit madness upon them rather than kill them, but if the okiku thinks that
anyone else they cross paths with is in any way guilty of causing pain, they
are happy to visit torment upon them as well.
In addition to the madness they can induce in others, they also can emit ear-
shattering wails of their own grief. Often these cries are the first indication
that an okiku is nearby.
The ethereal form of an okiku cannot be touched with normal physical
objects. They can phase through sword attacks as easily as they phase
through walls. However, some of our mystics have found particular
blessings that they can bestow upon weapons that for a time will allow a
warrior to drive off okiku. Yes, drive off, for they cannot be killed. Only
when they finish tormenting their own killer will the okiku fade from this
world and finally find rest in the next.
Quest: A particularly ruthless ronin has created a number of okiku
throughout the years and always managed to stay a step ahead of them by
roaming the Firelands far and wide. Unfortunately, the ronin was killed in
a simple climbing accident, and now the okiku are furious that they have
lost the object of their torment. Who do you know that may have a way to
stop these okiku and put them to rest?
YOUR TRUTH
Is it true that the okiku tell their victims they will finish
tormenting them after they count to ten? If so, why?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                          42
    ONRYO                                                           HORROR
    Rank:      Formidable (1 progress per harm; inflicts  3  harm)
                 Vengeful spirit that can't die
    Features:    Long, unkempt hair, blue skin
                 Exudes feeling of fear
                 Spread suffering
    Drives:      Harass the living
                 Avenge their death for peace
                 Cause disease with touch
    Tactics:     Disappear and reappear
                 Frighten by looks alone
    The onryo are very similar to the okiku in that they are both vengeful spirits
    that spend their time harassing the living. However, the onryo are known
    to spread disease rather than madness. Those inflicted by the onryo's touch
    have little chance to live, and if they do survive, it will only be after many
    nights of feverish nightmares.
    Additionally, where the okiku silently glide, the onryo simply appear from
    one place to the next. We don't know exactly how far an onryo can use this
    teleportation ability, but it is not as far as one can see. Despite this
    limitation, the fact that they can pop into existence directly behind
    someone and touch them with the curse of disease make them nearly
    impossible for a lone warrior to drive off.
    Quest: A rare herb known as ryu ketsueki, dragon's blood, is thought to be
    able to cure the onryo disease. However, this rare flower only blooms in
    the discarded egg shells of azure dragons. Who do you know that is
    suffering from the onryo sickness so that you are willing to undertake the
    quest to find the dragon's blood flower?
    YOUR TRUTH
    The onryo are known to be able to frighten with their horrific
    visage. Is this a function of their grotesque nature, or does
    their face morph and change to prey upon individual fears?
43                THE FIRELANDS | BASED ON JAPANESE MYTHOLOGY
TSUKUMOGAMI                                                         HORROR
Rank:     Troublesome (3 progress per harm; inflicts  1      harm)
            100 year old sentient item
Features:   Abused and discarded tool
            Vengeful to previous owner's family
            Avenge their abuse
Drives:     Free other similar items
            Drain life energy
            Pose as a normal item
Tactics:    Surprise attack
            Only attacks living, organic matter
Also known the smith's bane, tsukumogami are any item that was treated
with constant abuse and disrespect that then returns 100 years later to seek
revenge on the descendants of its previous master. Whether or not these
bloodthirsty items actually exist or not is a matter of debate, but no one can
deny the peculiar circumstances of some deaths: a person who died falling
on a hammer, one who died with a pair of rusted tongs in the eye, or
another found with a horseshoe wrapped around their neck. Were these
items come to life? Doubtful, but some still believe the stories.
Quest: A fourth generation blacksmith is renowned for the quality of
katana they make, but recently their blades have been snapping
prematurely or detaching the tang from the handle. The smith claims that
he is still using his great-grandmother's tools and that they are turning into
tsukumogami. He seeks someone who can help him reverse the curse on
his tools. While the story sounds outrageous, what special knowledge do
you have that may lend some credence to this smith's story?
YOUR TRUTH
Are tsukumogami truly alive and sentient, or are they simply
animated by another more malevolent spirit?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                         44
    KUCHISAKE                                              FIRELANDER
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts  2  harm)
                Zealous, unhinged assassin
    Features:   Self-mutilated face
                Bladed fans
                Serve their daimyo
    Drives:     Destroy the vain and beautiful
                Enjoy the pain of others
                Dance and slice with their fans
    Tactics:    Reveal their face for shock
                Seduce and kill
    The very first kuchisake was a deranged serial killer, but she started a fad.
    Some female assassins now follow in her footsteps by slitting their own
    mouths out into wide and gruesome smiles and fanatically spouting the
    hate of vanity and beauty that the original did.
    While many viewed this as a psychological trauma that needed addressed,
    some enterprising daimyo saw this as an opportunity. The daimyo took in
    these fledgling copycats and trained them to be killing machines that they
    could point in any direction they saw fit.
    If a woman with a fan covering her jaw asks you, "Am I beautiful?", you
    should run away. It is likely a kuchisake assassin on the way to a kill who
    wants to use you as the warm-up act.
    Quest: A kuchisake has been killing frequently in one of the largest
    settlements, but none of the nearby daimyo or shogun are claiming control
    of the assassin. Why do you need to find out who is responsible for
    unleashing the killer?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Is the kuchisake merely a name given to these copycat killers,
    or is there an actual organization or school of assassins behind
    the fierce killers?
45               THE FIRELANDS | BASED ON JAPANESE MYTHOLOGY
NINJA                                                          FIRELANDER
Rank:           Dangerous (2 progress per harm;   inflicts  2  harm)
                  Martial arts master
Features:         Stealthy, cunning, and swift
                  Saboteur and spy
                  Gather info for victory
Drives:           Fight the oppressors covertly
                  Train in specialized schools
                  Strike from shadows
Tactics:          Misdirection and subterfuge
                  Deflect and redirect strikes
Ninja are equally derided and lauded depending on who you speak with.
Most samurai consider them to be without honor due to their willingness
to deceive and work in the shadows, but the common people view them as
folk heroes fighting against oppressive shogun in the only way they can.
Whatever your view of the ninja, it is hard to dispute their effectiveness. A
sole ninja can wage irregular warfare against a squad of samurai in such a
way as to be a significant threat. They are masters at finding out valuable
information and then using that information to their best advantage.
Some claim that secretive schools of ninja exist where they learn varied
skills based on their clan such as turning invisible, walking on water, or
even bending the elements. However, no such school has ever been found.
This much is true: if you are confronted by a ninja, you are already deep
into intrigue whether you mean to be or not. Moreover, you're in grave
danger because if the ninja is allowing you to see them, they are either
desperate or the stakes are higher than you can imagine.
Quest: A daimyo suspects an area deep within a thick forest to house a
ninja school and wants it investigated. Why are you willing to seek out this
school, and what connection do you have with this particular school if it
exists at all?
YOUR TRUTH
What symbol has shown up with enough regularity to be
considered the symbol of a ninja clan?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                        46
    SAMURAI                                                FIRELANDER
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts  2  harm)
                Trained warrior
    Features:   Weapon and armor expert
                Loyalty and honor above all
                Follow the daimyo's orders
    Drives:     Follow the way of Bushido
                Bring honor to their family and clan
                Draw the circle
    Tactics:    Blades of strongest iron
                Never run from a battle
    The samurai are held in the highest respect in the Firelands. Unfortunately,
    they are not always viewed positively as their code forces them to
    obedience to their lord over their own judgments of right or wrong. At
    times they are saviors, and at times they are executioners. While there are
    some corrupt samurai, most are honorable but find that honor at times binds
    too tightly, forcing their hand.
    To become a samurai, one must train for years with a lord as their sponsor.
    At the end of their training, they reaffirm their fealty and are gifted with a
    suit of armor in the daimyo's motif. At that point, their word is nearly
    equivalent to law in the daimyo's domain.
    Quest: A samurai recently turned rogue against a corrupt daimyo. The
    people love the samurai and are thankful to be rid of the daimyo, but the
    samurai deeply feels their betrayal of their daimyo makes them no longer
    worthy of life. The samurai has declared that once a new leader is
    installed for the settlement, they will leave and rid the world of their own
    presence. How do you know this samurai, and what would it take to
    convince them of their purity and heroism?
    YOUR TRUTH
    What clan of samurai is known, respected, and fear throughout
    the Firelands?
47                  THE FIRELANDS | BASED ON JAPANESE MYTHOLOGY
SHIKI         ADEPT                                        FIRELANDER
Rank:         Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts  2  harm)
                Summon origami-like spirits
Features:       Shiki spirits serve their creator
                Spirits have no will
                Spy and steal
Drives:         Operate in secrecy
                Find sites of power
                Swarm of paper cranes
Tactics:        Death by a thousand cuts
                Bury in mounds of paper
The shiki adepts are a strange group of mystics who hold power over
mindless spirits that manifest themselves as constructs of a paper,
parchment, or vellum-like material. They can direct these spirits at their
whim to use as weapons or as spies.
While the shiki adepts zealously guard the secrets of their magic, it is
assumed that these spirits have some form of intelligence and
communication ability since they can use them as spies. This has led to the
practice of daimyos having no paper in their council rooms so that nothing
can be gleaned by a shiki adept.
No one knows the nature of the shiki spirits. Are they related to ancestral
spirits? Are they primordial in nature? We do not know, but what we do
know is that a shiki adept can be dangerous and is rarely guided by a code
of honor. You have been warned.
Quest: A daimyo's child always made paper cranes and other origami with
great proficiency as they grew up. Now that they have reached the age of
responsibility, they have been accused of being a shiki adept. The accused
once said something to you that you can't forget and can't understand.
What was it?
YOUR TRUTH
Is there a place where the shiki adepts are revered rather than
feared? If so, why?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                      48
    YOKI MAGERU                                                          BEAST
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts   2 harm)
                Ice and snow ritualist
    Features:   Adept at reading weather
                Immune to cold
                Respect the power of nature
    Drives:     Find sites of power
                Adapt plants to cold weather
                Encase in blocks of ice
    Tactics:    Induce hypothermia
                Drive back foes with blizzard winds     and then        retreat
    The yoki mageru are also called icebenders. While they don't have a
    versatile enough control to be called waterbenders, they do have
    unbelievable control and power over snow and ice. These mystics tend to
    be academic in nature as they search for ever more mysterious magics and
    powers.
    Yoki mageru also have a deep respect for nature and seek to help all life
    thrive in the cold. They are known to keep exotic plants and herbs that
    grow on the slopes of volcanoes in their gardens where they experiment
    and subject them to ice and cold in order to make them a hardier species.
    They tend to focus on herbs that can be used medicinally so that the plants
    can prosper in more areas.
    Generally speaking, a yoki mageru is a good friend to have, but woe to
    those that cross them. They can ice the fire out of any Firelander.
    Quest: One yoki mageru is particularly obsessed with an herb known as
    the flaming lotus. What special properties is this plant rumored to have,
    and what reason do you have for getting some of it?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Are the yoki mageru always female? If so , why?
