NEW FOES
The Tigerlands are riddled with small pockets of the firstborn. The stories
and myths that we took as fiction in the Old World have turned out to be
based in fact here on this continent. As such, we must be very careful when
we seek out new resources for survival because those resources are very
often already claimed by someone else.
Not only must we be careful to respect the firstborn boundaries and
cultures, but the animal life in the Tigerlands is diverse, dangerous, and
plentiful. Tigers and lions are in a constant battle for territory. Bears and
leopards both patrol the same territories that are free from the tigers or
lions. Crocodiles have adapted to salt water and will attack canoes or rafts.
Wild elephants go mad and trample whole settlements. Cobras can be
found in every nook and cranny despite the mongooses'best efforts.
This is a dangerous world, but it is our home now. We must press on.
Design Notes: Many of the mythological creatures I found while
researching were humanoid in nature with some animal hybridization
mixed in. I decided to make all of those type of creatures be firstborn for
this setting, but that may present a problem for players who utilize a
human-only version. To allow for this issue, I dug a little deeper into the
research and added a few more foes than I normally do so that there are
now at least a few in each category.

    AJAKAVA                                                     ANIMAL
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
                Scorpion that can grow to the size of a bear
    Features:   Orange and green armored plates
                Blade-like appendages near the mouth
                Hunt food
    Drives:     Search for water sources
                Drive off other arachnids
                Sting with venomous tail
    Tactics:    Slash and grip with pincers
                Impale with mouth blades
    When the ajakava scorpion are born, they are only about the size of your
    little finger, but they grow quickly into a giant hunter of the jungles. With
    a lifespan of decades if not centuries, we think that they never really stop
    growing. We have found molted scorpion shells the size of wolves, bears,
    and one the size of an elephant.
    Even the tigers will give these creatures a wide berth as their sting is
    enough to incapacitate an elephant. Couple that with their deadly pincers,
    and you can see why this creature is deadly for Tigerlanders. Moreover,
    the ajakava can easily attack multiple targets because they have evolved a
    secondary set of blade-like appendages near their mouth that they use to
    impale prey in place while they use their pincers or tail to attack others.
    The only effective strategy we have found to defeat an ajakava is to sneak
    attack it from the rear. Their stinger is jointed in such a way that it can only
    strike in a narrow arc in front of it. If you can begin a battle with an ajakava
    by severing its tail, you may have a moderate chance of surviving, but the
    best advice is to never engage in the first place.
    Quest: Ajakava, like all scorpions, have live birth, and each litter birthed
    usually contains anywhere from ten to forty young who swarm whatever is
    nearby for food. A bloated and likely pregnant ajakava bigger than any
    seen before attacked a small group of travelers stinging one of the people
    and dragging them off as the others fled. It is probable that the captured
    person will be used as food for the ajakava's soon to be born young. Who
    is the captured person? What makes the area of the scorpion's nest
    particularly dangerous?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Can ajakava burrow and tunnel underground?

BAAGH                                                                ANIMAL
Rank:     Formidable (1 progress per harm; inflicts  3        harm)
            Muscled feline body
Features:   Agile movements
            Orange and black stripes
            Hunt
Drives:     Sleep
            Breed
            Stalk prey from the shadows
Tactics:    Claw and bite
            Leap and snap the neck of prey
The baagh is dominant species of tiger in the Tigerlands. It is the largest
cat on the continent, slightly larger than lions, and also has the largest
canine teeth of any type of cat. Between their fangs and claws, the baagh
tigers are the royalty of the jungles.
Despite their size, the baagh is an adept tree climber. From their hiding
spot in low branches, they can pounce down on prey with enough force to
immediately snap the neck of their prey. Baaghs also are known to sleep
in trees to avoid being targeted by a stray ajakava or naag.
While they primarily prey upon boar, deer, antelope, ox or water buffalo,
the baagh has also earned the reputation of being a man-eater. This may be
related to their obvious similarities with the rakshasa firstborn, but there
have been many instances of Tigerlanders falling prey to a baagh.
Further cementing their status as the apex predator of the region, the baagh
tigers are very capable swimmers. They are comfortable attacking prey at
the water hole, and crocodiles usually will not attempt attacking a baagh
swimming in their river territory because even in water the tiger is deadly.
Quest: An aged baagh lives near a settlement who views the animal as a
guardian spirit. The elder tiger has gotten to the point that it can't hunt for
itself and survives only with the help of the Tigerlanders. The overseer is
seeking a group of hunter who will ceremonially lay the baagh to rest.
Despite it's infirmity, this is still a dangerous proposition. What happened
in your past that you owe a debt to the overseer forcing you to take on this
task?
YOUR TRUTH
Baagh have developed an unusual ability or characteristic.
What is it?

    CROCOTTA                                                     ANIMAL
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
                Large cross between wolf and lion
    Features:   Jaw made of a single serrated bone
                Canine-like head with a lion's mane
                Track and hunt with the pack
    Drives:     Scavenge buried corpses
                Howl at the moon, roar at the sun
                Pounce, rake, bite the jugular
    Tactics:    Imitate sounds of prey to lure them in
                Herd the prey to advantageous ground
    The crocotta has thin fur that is an ever-shifting gradient from gray to tan
    which allows them to better hunt both at night and during the day. They
    sleep in short periods throughout a full day so that they can maintain their
    lifestyle as both diurnal and nocturnal creatures.
    One of the most frightening abilities of the crocotta is their skill at
    mimicking sounds of prey they have encountered. Much like a lyre bird, a
    crocotta can convincingly sound like a crying child, a Tigerlander in pain,
    or another wounded animal in order to draw in their prey.
    They tend to hunt in small packs by herding their prey into an area where
    the pack can easily surround multiple prey and kill them all. Despite their
    pack nature, the crocotta have also been known to hunt alone. In that case,
    they often strike swiftly and without warning rather than herding prey.
    Quest: A pack of crocotta were spotted fleeing through the plains. What
    did the crocotta fear so much that they were willing to abandon their
    territory without a fight? How will this threat impact the local community?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Are the crocotta natural creatures, or were they originally
    made through the mystic arts?

NAAG                                                               ANIMAL
Rank:      Troublesome (3 progress per harm; inflicts 1 harm)
             Cobra the size of a python
Features:    Light green expandable hood with two dark circles
             Variety of coloration patterns on the body
             Sun and sleep
Drives:      Opportunistically hunt
             Mate
             Hooding, hissing, and raising upper body erect
Tactics:     Lull into a false sense of security before striking
             Strike once with venom and wait for prey to die
The naag is a very large hooded cobra with highly lethal venom. Their
front fangs are hollow to allow for swift injection of their venom because
they are unable to keep their fangs embedded in their prey. Naags have an
excellent sense of smell and night vision making them most dangerous at
night.
They rarely go out of their way to hunt since they can go days or even
weeks without eating, but they will opportunistically prey on any creature
who passes by. Their preferred tactic is to announce their presence with a
defensive posture of hissing and hooding. When the prey notice them and
start to back off, the naag will also back away slowly. This makes the prey
think they can skirt around the naag which is when it strikes. Amotivated
naag can cover two Tigerlander arm spans of distance in the time it takes
lightning to flash. Slower prey have no chance against such a predator.
Other than the shyena, lions and tigers are the best hunters of the naag
because they aggressively move in closer to the snake instead of backing
away. They then present a front paw for the snake to strike, jump up
slightly when the snake does attack, and swipe the back of the naags head
with their other front paw. A great cat can decapitate a naag with a few
iterations of this tactic.
Quest: A skilled snake charmer had an extremely large naag companion
that they traveled with to perform. In the last settlement, the naag turned
on the charmer before disappearing into the jungle. It now returns each
night to terrorize the settlement. What caused the swift change in the
naag's behavior to make it so much more aggressive?
YOUR TRUTH
Is there a species of naag that is a spitting cobra?

    SHYENA                                                               ANIMAL
    Rank:     Troublesome (3 progress per harm; inflicts       1  harm)
                High flying hawk
    Features:   Bright red and orange feathers
                Razor-sharp talons
                Soar through the skies
    Drives:     Hunt naag
                Fortify their spherical nests
                Swift dive and stab deeply with talons
    Tactics:    Fly-by rake with talons
                Peck at the eyes
    Theshyenais aspecies of hawk said to haveoriginally spawned as servants
    to Agni, the god of fire. Legend says that in order to survive in close
    proximity to the god, their bodies developed a secretion with powers of
    rejuvenation. As they neared Agni, their feathers would burn off, but the
    oily secretion would rapidly regrow their feathers before they hit the
    ground.
    Whether the origin legend is true or not, this healing balm produced by the
    shyena makes them a highly sought after species for priests and healers.
    Moreover, it gives them the ability to prey on naags since they can be bitten
    but not feel the effects of the venom due to the revitalizing oil covering the
    wound.
    To produce the secretion, the shyena must fly to extreme altitudes. Some
    say this is the bird's attempt at reconnecting withAgni, but it is more likely
    that the changes in temperature or pressure trigger the production of the
    shyena oil. Additionally, the extreme heights give their attacks much more
    force as they dive bomb a prey and stab them with talons.
    Quest: A flock of shyena are known to nest in the nearby jungle and are
    protected by the local Tigerlander settlement. The birds have been trained
    to recognize a small group of falconers who can coax them to the ground
    for the shyena oil to be gathered without harming the birds. The last time
    the falconers went to the shyena nesting grounds, they never returned.
    Upon investigation, the falconers were found dead and the shyena nest
    abandoned. Who or what did this? How will the settlement survive now
    that their main trade good has been taken from them?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Are the shyena merely large hawks, or do they also possess
    supernatural or divine fire abilities?

FARASI BAHARI                                                 BEAST
Rank:     Troublesome (3 progress per harm; inflicts 1 harm)
            Horse head and torso
Features:   Fishes tail
            Emerald scales and skin with azure mane
            Graze on coastal algae
Drives:     Swim in the depths of the ocean
            Perform complicated mating displays
            Slap with their tail
Tactics:    Slash with front hooves
            Coil foe in their tail to drown
The farasi bahari, also known as water horses, spend most of their time
along the depths of the ocean floors making sightings rare. During a few
weeks throughout the year, water horses will surface and head towards the
coast to graze on great blooms of algae. It is commonly believed that if you
can entice a farasi bahari to breed with a normal horse during these times,
the resulting foal will have enhanced strength and speed as well as a
shimmering green coat.
While not extremely aggressive by nature, water horses are easily spooked
and respond by attacking rather than running away. Their first line of
attack is to use their front hooves to slash or their tail to bash their foe. If
their opponent persists in the battle, they have special bones in their tail
allowing them to extend it long enough to coil around a medium to large
sized creature. After capturing a land-based foe, they drag it into the
deeper ocean waters to drown it.
Quest: A horse breeder claims to have successfully bred his mare with a
farasi bahari, and the foal did indeed have an emerald coat. However, the
foal was stolen a few nights ago. Who do you suspect the thief is, and why
do you think it's not a simple case of theft?
YOUR TRUTH
Do the farasi bahari in your world act more aggressively?     If
so, why?

    REACHISEY                                                                BEAST
    Rank:     Formidable (1 progress per harm; inflicts 3 harm)
                      Head of a lion with a short elephant trunk
    Features:         Body of a dragon with armor-like scales
                      Bright green scales
                      Hunt and gorge
    Drives:           Defend its territory
                      Make a den for hibernation
                      Stand on its hind legs in a show of power
    Tactics:          Slash or impale with claws
                      Bite legs of prey
    The reachisey is a form of dragon that was long ago imbued with the
    characteristics of the lion and elephant. It's lion-like head and mane seem
    oddly out of place on the reptilian body but no more out of place than the
    short elephant snout the reachisey uses to drink the blood of its victims
    while it gorges on their flesh.
    At the size of a wyvern or large bear, the reachisey is a dominant predator
    in any region. However, their lack of cunning and stealth means that they
    can be killed by a large baagh on the prowl. We also exploit this lack of
    intelligence to lead reachiseys into traps or pitfalls where we can more
    easily kill them.
    It is said that the reachisey was once a pure dragon but was warped by an
    encounter with wayward arcane energies. If they were related to dragons
    or wyverns, the wings are no longer part of their anatomy, but the armor-
    like scales remain making this a difficult foe to take down.
    Quest: An arrogant warrior wants a suit of armor made the bodies of slain
    reachisey. They have hunted and killed three already, enough to make two
    suits of armor, but they want each piece of the armor to be taken from a
    single reachisey. While it is good that the reachisey population is being
    culled, something else is taking its place in the food chain. What is this
    new creature, and what dire threat does it pose?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Are there different colors of reachisey?          If so, what does each
    color signify?

SHARABHA                                                                BEAST
Rank:     Extreme (2 ticks per harm; inflicts 4 harm)
             Lion's body and head
Features:    Wings of a large falcon
             Eight legs
             Hunt and feast
Drives:      Defend its territory
             Find the high places of the world
             Jump and land on prey with their full body weight
Tactics:     Run down and trample prey
             Slash and rake with front claws
Sharabha are enormous, solitary beasts that are the size of the largest
elephant. Despite their bulk, they are able to fly with their feathered wings
albeit not very gracefully. It is doubtful that they could get enough altitude
to fly with just their wings, but they use six of their powerful legs to jump
into the air and begin gliding. Some claim to have seen a sharabha jump
high enough to clear a whole valley just by gliding to the other side.
This skill at jumping is also useful to them as they hunt. Their eyesight is
as good as an eagle or owl, and they can spot prey from afar as they are
gliding down after a vertical jump into the air.            They then propel
themselves straight down towards their prey crashing into them with
tremendous force. They spread out all eight legs as they land to distribute
the force evenly across their body so that the prey takes the majority of the
damage and not themselves. Still, it is common to see a sharabha with one
or two injured legs as the hunt is more important to them than safety.
We have learned to shy away from the mountainous areas of the Tigerlands
which is where the sharabha roost. They seem to have a penchant for
climbing to the highest peaks they can find, and thus, we avoid them.
Quest: A shunned and dishonored warrior has vowed to kill a rampaging
sharabha. On their own, this warrior stands no chance. How do you know
this person, and why do you support them despite their dishonor? What
will it take to convince them to accept help in their vow?
YOUR TRUTH
Do sharabha have a more humanoid upper torso with a lion's
head on top?

    VRITRA                                                                      BEAST
    Rank:     Epic (1 tick per harm; inflicts 5 harm)
                    Gigantic, serpentine dragon
    Features:       Obsidian armor-like scales
                    Great leathery wings
                    Consume all water
    Drives:         Desolate the land
                    Desiccate bodies
                    Consume the rain before it can fall
    Tactics:        Build earthen fortresses around river  sources
                    Overpower with size and might
    There is only oneVritra, the great water dragon. It is more a force of nature
    than a beast, but none-the-less, it is a physical being. Its gargantuan size
    and ability to fly make it the most feared creature in all the Tigerlands.
    The only respite we get from attacks by Vritra are when it sleeps for years
    at a time after consuming great quantities of water. It can drink whole
    lakes in a few moments and will stop up rivers with earthen fortifications
    so it can drink all the water straight from the source. Settlements that one
    day are near a life-giving river may find themselves in a desert by week's
    end after one of Vritra's attacks.
    A cult of Vritra worshippers has sprung up in the Tigerlands claiming that
    once Vritra's thrist is satiated, it will take its rightful place in the pantheon
    and reward those who helped slake its thirst. The Vritran cult will spend
    years building great reservoirs of water as an enticing target for Vritra
    when it awakes.
    Quest: A priest of the Vritran cult claims to have found the place of Vritra's
    slumber and is now diverting whole rivers to create an enormous lake for
    it when it awakens. A group of overseers met and decided to send a party
    of warriors to sneak past the Vritrans and kill Vritra while it sleeps.
    However, a powerful artifact must first be found that will enable the
    warriors to pierce the dragon's armor. What is this artifact? What tie does
    it have to your family history?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Does Vritra really have wings and fly, or is it a burrowing
    dragon who can tunnel across a region in minutes? If it
    burrows, what significant structure did it topple the last time it
    moved across the land?

ASURA                                                        FIRSTBORN
Rank:           Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts  2  harm)
                  Yellow-hued skin tones
Features:         Clothing adorned with iconography
                  Angelic wings
                  Worship the sun gods
Drives:           Oppose the devas
                  Protect the Patala Dvaar region
                  Attack with weapons of light
Tactics:          Blind and stun
                  Create illusions
Some say the asura are demons who escaped from the underworld. Others
say they are divine beings trying to seal off the underworld. However, they
may both be wrong. It is possible that the asura are descendants of an
ancient people who were the first inhabitants of the Tigerlands, the first of
the firstborn.
Whatever their ancestral roots, the asura have an affinity for controlling
and manipulating light through mystic arts. To them, wielding a sword of
pure light is nothing more complicated than wielding a sword of steel, and
perhaps even less complicated in their mind. They can call forth powerful
motes of pure light, wreathe a shield in a protective layer of light, or alter
hues of ambient light so precisely that a person sees something that is not
truly there, merely an illusion.
Since we first became aware of the existence of the asura, they have been
at war with the devas in Patala Dvaar. As far as we can tell, this war has
been perpetually waging seen time out of mind.
It is rare that an asura will make their way south, but when they do, they
often tuck their wings tightly to their back or cover them with a cloak so
that they can pass as a Tigerlander. It is true that they are similar in
anatomy to us, but as we understand it, there are four genders of asura and
all four are necessary for procreation. They are nar, pun, mahila, and stan.
Quest: The fourth member of an asura parental group has gone missing.
Without the stan's contribution soon, the developing embryo may die.
What dangerous place was this asura going to? Why do you offer to help?
YOUR TRUTH
Are the asura attuned to light or fire?

    DEVA                                                         FIRSTBORN
    Rank:      Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
                       Blue-hued humanoid
    Features:          Small gills on the neck
                       Wide, webbed feet and hands
                       Worship the water gods
    Drives:            Oppose the asura
                       Keep outsiders away from Patala Dvaar
                       Crossbows and harpoons
    Tactics:           Attack from underwater
                       Manipulate the weather
    Much like the asura, devas are at times called demons or divine but are
    likely descendants of an ancient people like the asura. Devas are especially
    attuned to water and can control or manipulate it even in the weather. They
    may call forth a rain storm to ground the flying asura during a fight and
    then flood the battlefield to drown the asura.
    While it would be foolhardy to label an entire people group as malevolent,
    there is a subset of devan society that worships Vritra as the greatest of the
    water gods who will reshape the world soon. The devan sect of the Vritran
    cult is happy to destroy parts of the world with the fervent belief that it
    doesn't matter since the world will all be reshaped and reborn in Vritra's
    waters anyway.
    From the little we have gathered about the devas, they are a single gender
    society that reproduces asexually. Their bodies go through cycles of
    needing to breathe more water and then needing more air with each cycle
    lasting months. During the water phase, the devan body produces the egg
    of their young, and during the air phase, they can choose whether or not to
    fertilize the egg.
    Quest: A wounded deva shows up at a settlement seeking asylum and
    protection from a band of asura hunting it. What object of power does the
    deva have in their possession that makes you wary of helping them? What
    would happen if that object fell into the wrong hands?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Do devas have tails that help them swim better?

GANESHAN                                                        FIRSTBORN
Rank:        Formidable (1 progress per harm; inflicts 3 harm)
               Large humanoid with an elephant's head
Features:      Tusks adorned with beads
               Thick gray skin
               Understand how and why the world functions
Drives:        Collect the lore of the realms
               Stay neutral in conflict
               Diplomacy
Tactics:       Spears and staves
               Wall of shields
The elephant folk known as ganeshans are the self-proclaimed high gurus
of all the Tigerlands.  Their society prides itself on their wisdom,
knowledge and ability to apply logic over emotion to a troubling situation.
They are also known for their devotion to the arts, particularly that of
written epics. Their writing is widely recognized as some of the most
beautiful script in the lands.
It is possible that the ganeshans continue to thrive in such a harsh
environment as the Tigerlands due to their stance on maintaining neutrality
in all disputes. While their people are relatively few in number compared
to other firstborn or us Tigerlanders, they have nonetheless been able to
avoid tragedy in their communities through rational discourse and
compromise.
Those who test the ganeshans quickly find out that they are not only wise
but also strong and capable warriors when the need arises. Their warriors
are first trained with a spear and large shield, but many ganeshans quickly
trade the spear out for a staff in order to deal less lethal damage. Despite
this, being hit with a ganeshan staff is still exactly like being hit by an
elephant: not good.
Quest:Aremote and hidden ganeshan community is said to house a library
with a wondrous tome of knowledge among the normal lore. What is the
subject of this powerful tome, and what do you need it for?
YOUR TRUTH
What do the patterns or colors of the beads on ganeshan trunks
signify?

    KIMPURUSHA                                                   FIRSTBORN
    Rank:     Formidable (1 progress per harm; inflicts 3 harm)
                Lion-headed humanoid
    Features:   Flowing beards/manes
                Elegant sherwani jackets and pagri turbans
                Loyalty to the pride
    Drives:     Defend their territory
                Following the social hierarchy
                Urumi strikes
    Tactics:    Roaring frontal charge
                Draw the circle
    Our name for kimpurusha comes from the phrase, "Is it human?" When
    we first saw them from afar, we thought their manes were bushy beards, but
    we could also see the coloration of their fur and feline heads. We continue
    to refer to them as kimpurusha because they are unwilling to share their
    own language or culture with us.
    We do know that they are fiercely loyal to each other. The surest way to
    die in battle against these lion folk is to injure one of them which then
    enrages the others making them fight doubly hard. It is easier to set your
    weapons down and admit defeat before the battle even begins. At least that
    way you have a chance of being allowed to live and let go.
    The other thing we know is that there appears to be a strict pecking order,
    at least among their warrior groups. The apparent leader of a squad is
    obeyed without question, but a series of commands are then made by other
    kimpurusha in an orderly fashion that descend through the ranks.
    Quest: A kimpurusha settlement was discovered relatively near to a lake
    that the Tigerlanders are eager to fish. With other food supplies running
    low due to the inability to grow crops, the overseer wants to make contact
    with the lion folk and negotiate for use of the lake. What happened the last
    time you crossed paths with the kimpurusha?
    YOUR TRUTH
    The kimpurusha culture is highly honor driven. Does this
    manifest as a noble, respectful society or as a defensive, easily
    offended society?
    (Design Note: Think Arthurian knights versus Klingons)

KINNARA                                                     FIRSTBORN
Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
            Horse-headed humanoids
Features:   Hands protected by gauntlet-like hooves
            Extreme speed on the open plains
            Travel the lands with their herds
Drives:     Live in balance with nature
            Isolate from other cultures
            Charge with halberds
Tactics:    Out maneuver foes
            Flank
The kinnara look similar to the mythical minotaur except with equine
features rather than bovine. Their legs have a similar musculature as a
normal horse which makes their stride length tremendous. On an open
plain, they can match a normal horse's gallop and maintain that speed for
nearly as long as their animal counterpart.
Kinnara usually live in small nomadic herds on the western plains where
they travel from place to place so that they don't reduce the natural
resources in one area too much. They set up colorful tents made from the
stalks of a wild grain that only grows in the west and can pack up their
whole camp on a few small wagons they hitch to their belts to pull.
While most kinnara herds are not aggressive, they swiftly become so if we
get too close to them. They wield wicked looking halberd and other pole
arms with deadly efficiency. Thus, we have yet to establish any formal
contact with their people, and we're quite sure that's the way they like it.
Quest: A traveling kinnara herd has been leaving behind sick and dying
horse folk, and some of the diseased corpses made their way into the water
supply of a nearby Tigerlander settlement. Having never been exposed to
this disease before, it is running like wildfire through the settlement. Who
is a powerful healer that you know who may be able to help? Would the
kinnara have more information about this disease that you need?
YOUR TRUTH
Are the kinnara in your world more like centaurs? If not, are
they able to bend down to use their arms as another pair of legs
allowing them to run on four legs?

    NAGA                                                         FIRSTBORN
    Rank:      Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
                 Torso and head of a human
    Features:    Long snake tail instead of legs
                 Colorful body paint with intricate patterns
                 Gain power from the underworld
    Drives:      Dominate other cultures
                 Move up the social ladder by pushing others down
                 Powerful bows that shoot multiple arrows
    Tactics:     Tail slap
                 Mystic arts
    Our current belief is that the snake folk known as nagas originated in the
    underworld. We don't know if they came to this realm to conquer it, or if
    they are stuck in this realm trying to get back to the underworld and need
    more power or resources to do so. Either way, encountering nagas is
    usually dangerous.
    They have developed a powerful longbow with slots to shoot multiple
    arrows at once. We're not sure how they have the strength to pull back
    these bows. It's possible that they have tendons that run through their arms
    all the way down their tails because they usually coil their tails as they fire
    the bows. Because of the extreme distance these bows have and their
    accuracy when using them, we often don't know that nagas are nearby until
    some of our Tigerlanders fall dead to their arrows.
    Very rarely we spot a naga who has smaller snake heads growing out of
    their necks. These naga seem to be treated with special deference and also
    seem to be their most gifted mystics.
    Quest: A group of nagas seem to be on the hunt for something. They are
    killing and pillaging their way through the area, but their battles seem
    secondary to them as they spend the majority of their time searching and
    sifting through wreckage. What powerful item is rumored to be in the area
    that they may be looking for? What could the nagas accomplish if they had
    control of this item?
    YOUR TRUTH
    What powers does a naga gain if they have snake heads
    growing from their neck? What does the number of snake
    heads growing there signify?

RAKSHASA                                                      FIRSTBORN
Rank:      Formidable (1 progress per harm; inflicts 3 harm)
             Tiger-headed humanoid
Features:    Heights typically larger than the tallest Tigerlander
             Strength of a giant with feline grace to match
             Hunt
Drives:      Feast and drink
             Battle for supremacy
             Swift claw attacks
Tactics:     Vicious bite
             Martial arts styles
The rakshasa earned a reputation as "man eaters" early on in our
exploration of the Tigerlands. They love a good battle and often eat their
foes after a victory. Some say this is because they view burying the bodies
as wasting resources, and others claim its because the rakshasa gains some
power or wisdom by ingesting their enemies.
Tiger folk love a good competition whether it is who can kill the boar on a
hunt, who has the most kills in battle, or who can leap the furthest across a
mountain passage. While not foolproof, capitalizing on this need to always
be the best has saved the life of more than one Tigerlander captured by the
rakshasa.
During a fight, the rakshasa typically like to toy with their foe. Due to their
overwhelming size and strength, they feel confident that their foes will
usually go down with a single strike, and due to their agility and mastery
of martial arts, they are confident that no foe can strike them.
Unfortunately, their confidence is not unwarranted.
Quest: An aged rakshasa has abandoned their people and is offering to
teach Tigerlanders the secrets of their martial arts. What ulterior motive
might this rakshasa have? What series of unusual events has befallen the
last several pupils the rakshasa had?
YOUR TRUTH
Are the rakshasa actually a form of demon?

    RIKSHA                                                       FIRSTBORN
    Rank:     Formidable (1 progress per harm; inflicts   3  harm)
                     Humanoid bears
    Features:        Thick fur of various colors
                     Kiln-hardened wooden armor
                     Defend their dens
    Drives:          Gather and fortify for hibernation
                     Be masters of the mountains
                     Deadly chakram throw
    Tactics:         Stout hammer blows
                     Overwhelming brute force
    The riksha consist of several different groups of bear folk. While it's not
    uncommon to see brown and black bear folk mixed in groups, the white-
    furred riksha rarely mingle with others. There are also tribes of bear folk
    with a bright sun burst on their chests and tribes with bear folk that
    resemble sloths.
    While each tribe favors different weapons, the adoption of the chakram
    seems to be near universal. With the strength the riksha possess, they can
    deeply embed the bladed discs into their foes and sometimes even cut a
    Tigerlander in two with a single throw. We believe their reliance on these
    weapons is due to their large claws interfering with the use of a more
    traditional bow and arrow.
    During our first few winters in the Tigerlands, we noticed that the riksha
    were never spotted during the depths of winter. We believe that they
    hibernate during this time, but we cannot confirm it because they often
    collapse entrances to their dens for the winter.
    Quest: One riksha tribe appears to have exquisitely crafted weapons
    including hammers made from an iron unlike any other previously seen in
    the Tigerlands. What is this new iron ore, and what properties does it
    have? What secrets to smithing iron do these riksha posses?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Aselect few riksha are chosen to not hibernate and assigned to
    guard the den during the winter. Is this position considered a
    great honor? If so, how are the guardians chosen? What are
    the effects on a riksha who does not hibernate?

VANARA                                                      FIRSTBORN
Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
              Simian humanoids
Features:     Long strong tails
              Loose fitting clothing to maximize movement
              Explore ancient ruins
Drives:       Defend their treetop homes
              Expand their jungle territory
              Strike with their tail patar
Tactics:      Use the trees to their advantage
              Swarm their foes
The vanaran people are masters of the jungles who build extravagant
homes in the canopy of the trees. They can travel long distances through
the upper branches of the jungle faster than others can travel by foot on the
ground below.
This style of swinging from the branches extends to their approach to battle
as well. They will crisscross the battlefield attacking with the patar held in
their tails, and if they end up on the ground, they juggle two patars between
their hands and their tail so that their opponent never knows where a strike
will be coming from.
It may be true that not all the vanaran people are competent explorers, but
many of them are. They seem to have some special knowledge as to where
the hidden ruins of the world are located and mount regular expeditions to
these locations. In fact, we will often track and follow their groups to find
these ancient ruins ourselves. While there is never anything powerful left
after the vanara leave a site, we can sometimes use the crumbling stone to
build with rather than trying to quarry new rock.
Quest: A vanaran expedition uncovered yet another site of ancient ruins,
but this time they didn't come back out. It has been weeks since we saw
them enter the place, and our scouts now assume the expeditionary force
perished inside. What sigil or iconography can be seen at this site that
points to dangers inside? What do you hope to find within the ruins?
YOUR TRUTH
Are there vanarans without a tail?

    ALEYA                                                              HORROR
    Rank:      Troublesome (3 progress per harm; inflicts 1 harm)
                 Ethereal green orb floating over swamps
    Features:    Thin tendrils writhing out of the center
                 Slowly pulsing light as if breathing
                 Consume the spirits of the living
    Drives:      Confound the living
                 Protect sacred places
                 Lead people astray so they become hopelessly lost
    Tactics:     Touch with tendrils causing memory loss and confusion
                 Embed themselves in the chest of victim
    The ghostly lights of aleya are found in many of the swamps and marshes
    of the Tigerlands, particularly in the ghost swamps of Nadiyon Kee Maut.
    Legend says that these are the souls of fishermen drowned in the swamps
    whose only desire is to see others befall the same fate.
    Usually an aleya will simply try to confuse a victim's sense of direction in
    the hopes of getting them lost as eventually the victim will succumb to one
    of the myriad dangers of the swamp. However, sometimes an aleya will
    take more aggressive actions. If the light approaches close enough that it
    can brush its tendrils across your head, you are likely to be filled with
    confusion. You won't remember where you are or where you are going,
    and you'll likely allow the aleya to lead you to your death.
    The worst attack an aleya can make is to directly enter your body in an
    attempt to possess you. If this happens, your only hope is singing one of
    the sacred hymns until the aleya leaves your body.
    Design Note: You may treat an aleya like an anomaly instead of a
    traditional foe if you prefer.
    Quest: Aleya lights are known to haunt a nearby swamp, but recently five
    aleya each of different color have been seen working in concert. What do
    the different colors signify? Why are the aleya working together?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Is there a physical center to aleya, or are they completely
    ethereal?

HAYA       SIRAS                                             HORROR
Rank:      Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
             Blazing flame for a body
Features:    Top of the flame takes the shape of a horse
             Uncanny speed
Drives:      Burn the living
             Free working animals
             Flaming charge
Tactics:     Surround in a circle of fire
             Separate individual victims from the group
The haya siras are said be either tears ofAgni that fell to the earth and were
corrupted by contact with mortals or conjured servants of Keshi the horse
demon. Whatever their origins, these horrors are particularly dangerous
because of their speed. If they are not spotted in time, it is nearly
impossible to escape them.
Luckily, the haya siras can be temporarily removed from our plane of
existence. There is a physical core at the center of their flames that can be
attacked with normal weapons, but the mystic arts are a much more reliable
means of exorcising these demons. They fear the ritual retelling of the tale
of how Keshi was defeated, cower before the sacred hymns, and are most
vulnerable to water blessed by an enlightened guru.
Whether out of a sense of companionship or the desire to make life harder
for Tigerlanders, we have noticed that the haya siras often try to free our
horses, cattle, goats and other livestock. They will burn through any
restraints and then chase off the animals before turning back to deal with
us. For this reason, when traversing the swamps, we always blindfold our
horses at night so they are not as easily spooked.
Quest: A settlement was recently destroyed in a great conflagration set by
several haya siras. Another nearby settlement has decided to set out on a
mission to rescue the now free roaming livestock before they die in the
jungles. They have charms supposedly blessed with holy water to protect
them, but what makes you think the charms are fake? Who is going on this
mission that you desperately need to keep safe?
YOUR TRUTH
Was Keshi the horse demon truly defeated, or has the demon
returned for revenge?

    KALA       BHAKSHAK                                              HORROR
    Rank:      Epic (1 tick per harm; inflicts 5 harm)
                 Body consisting only of a large canine-like        head
    Features:    Pitch black skin
                 Surrounded by spectral tentacles
    Drives:      Devour living things
                 Instantly age a captured victim
    Tactics:     Swallow whole
                 Multi-tentacle strike
    Kala Bhakshak, the Time Eater, was said to be the one who would end the
    world. After all, time devours all things. Unfortunately, this legend is
    demonstrably true and evident in the Tigerlands.
    We do not know if there are multiple creatures that resemble the true Kala
    Bhakshak or if there is only the one that we continue to drive away from
    the material plane of existence at great cost. All that we know is that with
    many stout warriors, devout priests, master mystics, and wise gurus, we are
    able to defeat this horror at least temporarily.
    However, we know it is a losing battle. Each time a Kala Bhakshak
    appears, it is more and more difficult to drive away. It grows in power with
    each life it snuffs out. And dear gods, the screams. The screams of those
    who are ravaged by time in mere seconds while entangled in the creatures
    ghostly purple tentacles are sounds that haunt your nightmares.
    How or why Kala Bhakshak appears is a mystery, as are most things about
    the creature, but all Tigerlanders know that any feuds or battles are
    secondary to the need to defeat the Time Eater. When the call goes out, we
    all respond lest we all perish.
    Quest:Amystic claims to have a sample of phantasmal material taken from
    Kala Bhakshak the last time it appeared. When asked to destroy it, the
    mystic refused and fled. Several settlements have pulled together to put a
    bounty on this mystic and the sample before any experimentation can be
    done with the material. What doomsday cult is seeking to find the mystic
    for themselves in order to facilitate their research? What motivation do
    you think the mystic has to risk meddling with such a powerful substance?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Is Kala Bhakshak a single entity or a category of epic horror?
    What rare material is Kala Bhakshak vulnerable to?

PISHACHA                                                         HORROR
Rank:     Formidable (1 progress per harm; inflicts     3 harm)
            Pitch black humanoid
Features:   Violent red eyes
            Bulging veins covering the body
Drives:     Cause the living to suffer
            Drink the spirits of the living
            Inflict rapid onset disease
Tactics:    Spray others with their own diseased       blood
            Raking claws of pestilence
A pishacha is a terrible foe to face in battle. They have no regard for their
own body and in fact are quite happy to be torn apart as it spreads their
sickness that much faster. Their only desire is to see the living suffer and
die the slow painful death of disease. All it takes is a single touch from a
pishacha to develop painful boils or a shriveled hand.
Not only can a pishacha incapacitate you with their supernatural diseases,
but their size and bulk make them a physical threat as well. They have
lanky arms with dagger-like claws on their hands that they wield
effectively in battle.
While we can cut down pishachas with blades, their ichor oozes back
towards the main body portion and slowly stitches the pishacha back
together again over time. They can never be truly defeated except with fire.
Their body is highly flammable and even explosive when exposed to too
much fire too quickly.
There are medicine men, mystics and gurus who have discovered effective
treatments for a pishacha disease, but the treatment involves rare and
exotic materials that must first be gathered. Additionally, the course of
treatment is painful in and of itself so that not all survive the healing
process.
Quest:Adark mystic claims to have a pishacha in their thrall and threatens
to unleash it on a settlement unless their demands are met.      What
dangerous or unavailable thing does the mystic desire? How do you know
this mystic from your past?
YOUR TRUTH
Can the ichor and torn parts of multiple pishacha reform into a
single larger demon? If so, what is this demon known as, and
what are its unique abilities?

    YAKSHA                                                                HORROR
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
                Humanoid and ghostly body
    Features:   Distinctive leaf patterns writhing on their skin
                Dark oaken staffs
                Protect the forests
    Drives:     Lead the worthy
                Slaughter the unworthy
                Teleport from tree to tree
    Tactics:    Summon entangling vines
                Staff strike
    The yakshi are considered to be guardians of the forests, but each yaksha
    is unique from the next. It would be wrong to claim that all yakshi are evil
    forest spirits because a few yakshi have been known to help lost travelers.
    However, any individual yaksha can turn aggressive the moment it thinks
    you are an unworthy interloper.
    Most yakshi we have encountered patrol a small section of a forest. We
    don't know if they are tied to an individual tree or other aspect of the forest
    or if they are capable of leaving the area but choose not to. They do
    communicate in a rudimentary way, but we have found the longer we
    interact with them, the more likely we are to be found unworthy.
    When in battle with a yaksha, it can attack from any direction because it
    has the ability to "tree walk." The spirit walks into one tree and then walks
    out of a different tree that may be on the other side of a clearing.
    While the yakshi are non-corporeal in nature, it seems that weapons of iron
    have an effect on them. Additionally, their staves are made of true,
    physical wood. If they tree walk, they drop their staff. Many have tried to
    sunder a yakshi's staff, but this only enrages them more. It's best to drive
    them away with direct attacks or escape quickly.
    Quest: An ancient tree grows in the middle of the jungle and produces
    hallucinogenic fruit that is sought after for its uses in meditation towards
    enlightenment. However, the tree is diseased, and a yaksha has appeared
    asking for help healing it. What is needed to cure this elder tree? Why
    does the yaksha look familiar to you?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Are yakshi more benevolent in your world?

ASTOMI                                                         TIGERLANDER
Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
                 Thoughtful questions
Features:        Flowing and precise movements
                 Glowing aura of light
                 Seek further enlightenment
Drives:          Enlighten others even if against their will
                 Live in balance with the world
Tactics:         Subtle and sudden disabling attacks
                 Appeal to reason
Some of the great gurus reach a higher level of enlightenment that
produces physical changes in their bodies. They no longer need food or
drink but can gain nourishment simply from smelling the fragrance of a
fruit tree or the freshness of a mountain stream. Their body ages much
more slowly, and they isolate themselves from most in society. We call
them the astomi.
Unfortunately, the strain of enlightenment takes a toll on the mind as the
body and spirit begin to disconnect from that which anchors them to this
world. As they strive for higher and higher enlightenment, they seek to
impart their wisdom to others in more and more forceful ways. We excuse
this behavior because we know the astomi are close to nirvana, but this
does not make them any less dangerous when crossed.
Quest: One of the astomi has wandered into the settlement and begun to
meditate in the center of the village. Many gathered to pay respects to the
enlightened guru and waited patiently for teachings filled with wisdom.
After two days and two nights, still without speaking, the astomi
approached one villager after another and sketched a symbol on their
forehead that glowed for a time before disappearing. Once the symbol
absorbed into their bodies, the villagers began committing violence to
themselves and each other as the astomi watched. What is this enlightened
one trying to teach the people? Is the astomi still aware of the mortal realm
or has their mind already passed on?
YOUR TRUTH
Are astomi feared instead of respected? If so, do people openly
acknowledge the necessity of becoming astomi and accept the
chaos this can cause for others?

    RISHYASRINGA                                                  TIGERLANDER
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
                       Human with deer antlers
    Features:          Ability to seer possible futures
                       Engulfed in flame when overwhelmed
    Drives:            Guide others to avoid horrible fates
                       Search for patterns in the chaos of fate
    Tactics:           Disable with a vision of the future
                       Burn with a touch
    The rishyasringas are those who have been touched by Yama, god of the
    dead and the first of those to die. Those who experience an encounter with
    the god often go into a fevered dream state for several days during which
    time a pair of antlers grow on their head. From that point forward, they are
    no longer fully human and gain the ability to look into the chaotic swirls of
    the river of fate.
    A rishyasringa may be sought out before making significant decisions, but
    many times the message the rishyasringa delivers is cryptic and not what
    one expects. Through a mystic ritual, they can pull visions out of their own
    mind and place them into the mind of one who seeks answers. Thisinduces
    a vision in the person and incapacitates them until the vision is finished.
    Unfortunately, the chaos that rishyasringas navigate can also drive them
    mad. The closer they get to breaking, the warmer their body gets, and a
    spectral flame begins to surround their body and grow. At some point, the
    rishyasringa can contain the chaos no longer, and their mind breaks. The
    energy of pure chaos then manifests as a blazing inferno around them as
    they destroy themselves and those around them.
    You may seek the wisdom a rishyasringa can give, but is it worth the
    potential cost?
    Quest: A messenger approaches you claiming that a rishyasringa has
    summoned you. They have a vision to share with you of dire importance.
    The messenger says the rishyasringa is near the point of conflagration, but
    is attempting to hold on until you can see the vision. What have you seen
    in your dreams of late that give a clue to this vision? How did you know
    this rishyasringa before they gained their power?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Are the antlers the only manifestation of a rishyasringa's
    power? If not, what other physical changes take place?

WERETIGER                                                 TIGERLANDER
Rank:         Formidable (1 progress per harm; inflicts 3 harm)
                  Bulging muscles covered with sweat soaked fur
Features:         Stripes like a tiger but purple on sickly gray
                  Salivating jaw and elongated hands with claws
                  Stop the pain
Drives:           Destroy
                  Satiate bloodlust
                  Claw and bite
Tactics:          Pounce and rake
                  Ambush from hiding
Weretigers are a grotesque distortion of a Tigerlander who has been bitten
by a rakshasa or was twisted by a powerful mystic ritual gone wrong. The
person's body rapidly stretches and twists into a humanoid with the
strength and appearance of a grisly tiger.
Not every person bitten by a rakshasa turns into a weretiger, but we know
that it occurs with some frequency. If we knew exactly what the rakshasas
were doing to cause this reaction, we could put some protections in place,
but alas, we are powerless against this attack thus far.
When a Tigerlander turns into a weretiger after using a mystic ritual, it is
usually a ritual that has to do with imbuing strength. We think it possible
that these rituals are sabotaged by some unknown entity because the
transformation into a weretiger when these rituals go wrong also does not
occur every time.
Regardless of how it happens, one who has been transformed into a
weretiger becomes a killing machine roaring in pain and rage. They attack
whoever they can and at times run aimlessly through the jungles screaming
and roaring.
Quest: A weretiger was spawned after the last rakshasa attack, and now a
mystic in the settlement thinks they have a way to transform the weretiger
back into a human if only they can get the necessary ingredients and
capture the weretiger alive. Who was this weretiger to you before they
transformed that you are willing to risk your life to help them?
YOUR TRUTH
Are there other werebeasts, or are they always tigers?
