NEW FOES
The foes of the Icelands stick closely to the original Ironsworn foes. As
such, you should feel free to do a complete swap with these foes if you so
choose. For example, the elves in the Icelands also wear masks but have a
slightly different feel to them as there is a civil war between the two
dominant clans of elves in the Icelands.
Additionally, these foes are not the exact same as their namesakes, but that
was the starting place for creating a foe that fit the Ironsworn system and
Icelands setting. For example, some foes take their name from a single
creature of legend but are presented here as smaller, more common
versions of those foes to make them less god-like and more fantastical
beast-like.
For example, the Verflnir is originally a single hawk involved in the
legend of the World Tree, but here I've presented them as a whole species
of hawks that serve (or at least fly around with) a more powerful eagle.
                                                       26
    RATATOSKRA                                                    ANIMAL
    Rank:     Troublesome (3 progress per harm; inflicts 1 harm)
                   Large semi-intelligent squirrel
    Features:      Enjoys getting allies to fight each other
                   Steals food while others fight
                   Cause mischief
    Drives:        Find and store food
                   Run free through the forests
                   Get others to fight
    Tactics:       Swarm foes
                   Sharp teeth and club-like tail if necessary
    Who knew that the squirrels in the Icelands would be such a problem.
    Compared to the struggle of everyday existence, they would seem a small
    thing, but oh, they are clever. They drop nuts on our heads to make us think
    someone else threw it at us, and some even work in tandem to make
    another Icelander laugh at the same time to increase the enmity between us.
    As we rough and tumble "for our honor," they are chewing through the
    sides of our packs and making off with our food.
    Worse yet, their large size, that of a normal dog, makes them veritable
    fighters in their own right, particularly if they attack as a group. They
    sharpen their teeth by rubbing them against sandstone and have thick-
    boned tails that they can lock in place as if it were a stout club or mace.
    We all laugh at the one hurt by the little devils, but then there's not a one
    of us that hasn't been made the fool by them at some point.
    Quest: A trade caravan was pilfered by an efficient group of ratatoskra
    when they stopped for a break somewhere along the trade route. Before
    entering the next settlement, they took stock and noticed several small
    items missing. While it was mostly foodstuff taken, something very
    valuable also went missing. The lead trader is willing to pay a high price
    for its return but is keeping the exact nature of the object secret. What
    exactly is this lost trinket? And if only a group of squirrels took it, why do
    they need a warrior to get it back?
    YOUR TRUTH
    How large do the ratatoskra get? Are they poodle-sized or
    mastiff-sized?
    Do the ratatoskra have a symbiotic relationship with another
    type of creature? If so, what is the nature of that relationship?
27
SLEIPNIRA                                                             ANIMAL
Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm;    inflicts       2  harm)
            Rare eight-legged horse
Features:   Can run for days and not tire
            Difficult to befriend or train
            Run free
Drives:     Follow migration patterns
            Mate for life
            Double-hoof rear up
Tactics:    Charge and trample
            Multi-legged donkey kick
The sleipnira are descendants of Odin's horse of the same name, and like
their namesake, they have eight legs and all the power and strength that
brings. They generally roam free in the Midgard region and are kept there
by Ymir's Wall. Being confined to a single region helps keep their
numbers in check as well.
Due to their power and direct divine lineage, many seek to tame a sleipnira
as a mount, but they are not so easily won over. The process is one of
slowly building a relationship of trust with the creature until they deign to
have a rider. Those who complete this process have not only one of the
strongest and swiftest mounts but also a fierce protector.
Many people have not survived a horse's kick with both their back legs, but
imagine our horror when we first saw someone get kicked with six back
legs! They start the kick with their back two legs and continue rising up
with a kick from the next pair of legs until they have attacked with six
hooves in rapid succession.
Quest: A group of elves in bright golden masks have emerged from Alfheim
and stand at the border of Midgard demanding a herd of sleipnira to breed
for their own. What purpose do they have in mind for sleipnira in the deep
wilds of Alfheim? You have encountered elves with golden masks before.
What happened then that gives you pause at interacting with them now?
YOUR TRUTH
Legend tells of Odin's original Sleipnira growing wings and
flying the god across the realms. Do winged sleipnira exist in
the Icelands now? If so, where are they, and what are they
called?
                                                        28
    VEDRFOLNIR                                                             ANIMAL
    Rank:      Troublesome (3 progress per harm; inflicts 1 harm)
    Features:          Pale hawks said to follow and serve the mikillorn
                       Notorious hunters
                       Serve the mikillorn as scouts
    Drives:            Hunt, particularly snakes
                       Fly in the open skies
                       Stir great gusts of wind with wings
    Tactics:           Rake the eyes
                       Puncture deeply with talons
    The vedrfolnir are overgrown hawks with pale underbellies and razor-
    sharp talons. Seeing a vedrfolnir overhead is considered good luck as it
    likely means that no poisonous snakes will dare come out of hiding.
    Conversely, being attacked by vedrfolnir is seen as a mark of shame since
    the great hawks view you as nothing more than a serpent.
    Falconers prize the vedrfolnir as one of the most intelligent birds to work
    with and train, but no Icelander is willing to capture a free vedrfolnir to
    make it submit to falconry. Rather, if an injured fledgling or wounded adult
    is found and nursed back to health, it is seen as a sign from the gods that
    training that particular bird is permitted.
    One strange quality of the vedrfolnir is their ability to kick up great gusts
    of wind with wings which they do to throw a pursuer off balance giving
    them time to flee.
    Quest: A group of fledglings have been crying out for days after their
    mother perished at the hands of a roving nidhoggr wyrmling. The local
    settlement viewed the family of vedrfolnir as a badge of honor and seek to
    save the newborn birds, but even a very young nidhoggr serpent is
    dangerous. Why is saving these birds a point of honor for you as well?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Some claim that vedrfolnir are empathic and can share
    thoughts and feelings with one that they bond with. Is there
    truth in this belief?
29       
FENRIRKIN                                                                  BEAST
Rank:     Formidable (1 progress per harm;  inflicts  3  harm)
            Fiery, giant wolf
Features:   Exceptional strength
            Adept at avoiding traps
            Devour black iron
Drives:     Fight rival beasts
            Defend its territory
            Charge and knock down
Tactics:    Fiery bite
            Bite off hands/appendages
As with many creatures in the Icelands, the fenrirkin are descendants of a
creature of legend: Fenrir, the mighty wolf of fire. While not large enough
to take on the gods, the fenrirkin are still large, the size of dire wolves, and
retain their father's fiery trait in the form of jaws wreathed in flames.
Attacking a fenrirkin is rarely a good idea as they are good tacticians and
vicious to a fault. They don't just kill their prey, they make them suffer by
eating off appendages before finishing off their kill. Worse yet, the fiery
bite usually cauterizes wounds meaning their victims are sure to stay alive
until the fenrirkin want them dead. Avoid these beasts if at all possible lest
your life end in suffering.
Quest: A pack of fenrirkin have expanded their territory to include the
settlement of Brackwater. The wolves have become daring enough to
attack the village proper, and now a building has burnt down from their
last attack. Who did you lose in the resulting conflagration that causes you
to seek revenge on the beasts?
YOUR TRUTH
Are the fiery jaws of fenrirkin exaggeration? Is it really just
heat-filled jaws formed as a byproduct of chemical reactions
necessary for the fenrirkin to eat black iron? Or are the beasts'
bodies are fully wreathed in mystical flame?
                                                           30
    JORMUNGANDR                                                         BEAST
    Rank:     Epic (1 tick per harm; inflicts 5 harm)
                Massive sea serpent
    Features:   Emerald scales, red eyes
                Human-sized poison fangs
                Revenge on the Storm Bringer
    Drives:     Be master of the seas
                Poison the ocean and sky
                Constrict and crush ships
    Tactics:    Poison river mouths
                Bash and crumble fjords
    If only Jormungandr were a legend, but alas, it is not. The great serpent
    lives and has total control of the region of Niflheim where it hunts our
    whalers, other vessels and even kraken. Some of our smaller fishing boats
    have been wrecked by Jormungandr's passing likely without the great
    beast even taking notice.
    Not only is the creature deadly for its size and strength, but its very blood
    and bile are poisonous to many forms of life. The giant serpent will lie its
    head down at the mouth of river and push thick excretions out that slowly
    dissolve organic matter leaving nothing but stone untouched.
    It is said that Jormungandr still seeks revenge on the god Thor, and we
    believe that the god's ancient weapon, Mjolnir, may be the only weapon
    capable of harming the creature.
    Quest: The priesthood known as the Sect of the Storm believe that they can
    control Jormungandr's movements in the sea using their mystical powers
    to call forth a great storm. The theory is that Jormungandr will be drawn
    to the storm thinking it will find Thor, but they need a volunteer crew to test
    this idea. Why are you willing to do it? What happened in the past that
    convinces you of the need for such a desperate and dangerous plan?
    YOUR TRUTH
    There is a cult that worships Jormungandr as an ancient divine
    force of nature. What is their primary form of worship, and
    why are they a danger to their own people?
31           
KRAKEN                                                                BEAST
Rank:     Epic (1 tick per harm; inflicts 5   harm)
                Island-sized squid
Features:       Tentacles and sharp beak
                Plants growing off its head
                Feed on meat
Drives:         Protect its territory
                Avoid Jormungandr
Tactics:        Pretend to be an island and  sink when  people       arrive
                Wrap ships in its tentacles
As if Jormungandr were not dangerous enough in the seas, there are kraken
as well. These creatures are so large that they are often mistaken for small
islands and even have exotic plant life growing on their heads that add to
the ruse. They can be patient as they wait for ships to land on their
"beaches" or for shipwreck survivors to swim to their "shores" at which
point they rapidly submerge pulling their prey to a swift underwater death.
If they are hungry enough, they forgo the trap and directly attack ships
instead. They can encircle even our largest ships with their tentacles and
then apply enough pressure to literally snap the ship in half. The only way
we have learned to survive a kraken attack is to quickly hack off one or
more of its tentacles. While the tentacles will regrow, it sometimes forces
the kraken to pause in its attack and consider a more vulnerable target.
Every ship we build has a set of kraken saws specially designed to make
short work of the musculature of a kraken tentacle.
Quest: The ship Tollak was returning from a meeting with the dwarves of
Nidavellir when a kraken attacked. Rather than try to fight it off, the crew
immediately jumped ship, and only a few Icelanders survived. One such
survivor says that the ship was never actually destroyed by the kraken since
it got its meal from the people jumping overboard. Now the ship is floating
crewless in the sea, and the survivor claims an artifact of great importance
is still on the ship. What is this artifact, and why do you need it?
YOUR TRUTH
Instead of many kraken, is there only one Kraken that is large
enough to rival Jormungandr?
Is there a creature that lives in symbiosis with the kraken? If
so, what is it?
                                                       32
    MIKILLORN                                                              BEAST
    Rank:     Formidable (1 progress per harm;         inflicts  3  harm)
                       Giant, near sapient eagle
    Features:          Distinctive crown of feathers
                       Long, trailing tail feather
                       Gather knowledge
    Drives:            Observe from afar
                       Change the path of destiny
                       Grab, fly high, and drop
    Tactics:           Impale with beak
                       Buffet with wings
    The mikillorn eagles are huge, as tall as a giant when they stand on the
    ground with wings furled, and while their size makes them look
    intimidating, they are usually very peaceful creatures. Some of our priests
    claim that the majestic birds have near human intelligence and even serve
    the gods as keepers of knowledge and wisdom. Whether their divine
    service is true or not, it is true that the mikillorn prefer to observe from a
    distance without acting, but that doesn't mean they never act.
    It is said that at critical junctures in history, the mikillorn have intervened
    to change fate: a hero questing to slay a nidhoggr wyrm stopped by
    mikillorn only to find that the nidhoggr was an exiled and cursed king, a
    dam torn apart by mikillorn right before a drought when downstream
    settlements would have died, and other such stories are regularly told. For
    this reason and the claim of their guardianship of theWorldTreeYggdrasil,
    the mikillorn are held in high esteem.
    However, there are those who hunt the mikillorn for their distinctive
    feathers which can be sold to those who practice the more nefarious side of
    the mystic arts. Perhaps because of this, the mikillorn have become more
    wary, not necessarily aggressive yet, but not to be trifled with.
    Quest: The settlement of Graycliff is in the grips of a plague, and a mystic
    claims they can cure the illness for the whole village if they posses a
    mikillorn feather. With its amplified ability to push on fate, the mystic
    believes the illness can be forced to burn itself out. However, mikillorn
    often die without their signature tail and crowning feathers. Do the ends
    justify the means?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Are the mikillorn   fully sapient? If         so, how do they
    communicate?
33                      THE ICELANDS              | BASED ON NORSE     MYTHOLOGY
NIDHOGGR SPAWN                                                  BEAST
Rank:     Extreme (1 tick per harm; inflicts 5 harm)
            Shadowy, wingless serpent
Features:   Sleeps on mounds of bones
            Four stout legs and claws of iron
            Feast on oath breakers
Drives:     Hunt the smell of rusting iron
            Find and consume the tree of life
            Claw, bite, tail smash
Tactics:    Exhale darkness
            Acidic bite that decays metal
Legend tells of the one true Nidhoggr who perpetually searches for the
Yggdrasil in the region ofAsgard in order to swallow up the tree, but there
are also descendants of Nidhoggr the Great Shadow. These lesser wyrms
can hardly be thought of as lesser. They can slink and stealth their way into
most places despite their great size, breathe out great clouds of pure
darkness, and even devour metal. No structure is truly safe from a
nidhoggr spawn on the hunt.
Being hunted by a nidhoggr is truly a curse as we believe they are
somehow drawn to those who break their oaths, the liars and cheats who
took things one step too far. One such oath breaker, Egil the Terror, used
this to his advantage to travel across the realms allowing the nidhoggr
following him to wreak havoc in his wake. It was one of the darkest
periods of time here in the Icelands, and the land itself still bears the scars
from Egil's Last March.
Quest: The warrior Ingeborg entered the settlement of Stoneford
frantically calling for help saying that a nidhoggr had marked her as prey
unjustly. She says if the settlement is unwilling to help, she will try to draw
it away, but it is very close behind her. How do you know Ingeborg? What
connection do you have either with her or with Stoneford that stirs your
heart to help defend them both?
YOUR TRUTH
Can the spawn of Nidhoggr burrow underground?
If nidhoggr spawn eat from a plant in the same species as the
World Tree, they gain a frightening characteristic or ability.
What is it?
                                                          34
    DOKKALFAR                                                         FIRSTBORN
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm;  inflicts  2  harm)
                Elves with masks of bone
    Features:   Graceful and deceptive
                Semi-transparent skin
                Bring eternal darkness
    Drives:     Avoid harmful sunlight
                Build power and influence
                Fight from a distance
    Tactics:    Deceive and corrupt
                Attack from darkness
    Known as the Bone Elves, the Dokkalfar have been at war with the
    Ljosalfar, or Gold Elves, for centuries. As near as we can make out with
    our limited contact with the firstborn, the two clans of elves had some petty
    dispute that continued to escalate until the Gold Elves cursed a significant
    population of the Bone Elves to be unable to function in normal sunlight.
    The Bone Elves retreated to the underground, and their physiology has
    morphed accordingly over the generations.
    In order to continue attacks on their light-dwelling cousins, the Dokkalfar
    began to wear intricate masks of bone designed to not only protect their
    skin from sunlight for a short time but also to enrage and frighten the
    Ljosalfar. You see, the masks are made from the remains of Ljosalfar.
    The war continues to rage even now, but luckily we see little of it in
    Midgard. However, if you are traveling in Alfheim and see a white-faced
    being in the distant shadows, pray that it is merely a ghost or another
    horror, for the Dokkalfar are likely to be far more terrorizing.
    Quest: The Dokkalfar elf known as Dr-megil, the Dark Blade, has killed
    all of the members of Calsedryn's family, a Ljosalfar elf. Now Calsedryn
    is seeking someone to help take Dr-megil's mask and give the remains a
    proper burial. What does the Gold Elf offer as reward that is difficult to
    refuse?
    YOUR TRUTH
    The limited variety of plants that grow underground means
    that the color palette of the Dokkalfar clothing is limited.
    What colors do they mainly sport, and what does each color
    signify?
35               THE ICELANDS | BASED ON NORSE MYTHOLOGY
DWARF                                                       FIRSTBORN
Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
            Small humanoids formed of Ymir's corpse
Features:   Blue-tinted skins
            Bony protrusions
            Forge masterpieces, particularly weapons
Drives:     Avoid sunlight lest they turn to stone
            Prove their worth in battle
            Bluster and intimidation
Tactics:    Overwhelm with numbers
            Attack from the shadows
The dwarves of Nidavellir are said to have descended from the corpse of
the first giant, Ymir, the same giant whose bones even now encircle
Midgard. The dwarves certainly do have a similar blue-tinted skin as the
remaining jotnar and often take scrapings of Ymir's Wall as payment for
goods and services.
Since long before we arrived in the Icelands, the dwarves have lived
underground because of the effect sunlight has on their skin: it causes their
skin to harden like stone. Scattered across Nidavellir, you can find what
the crass among us call garden dwarves, dwarves turned to stone by
sunlight and cursed to spend eternity as statues. The poor souls are often
surrounded by offerings of family members who take pilgrimages to see
them when night fully falls.
Quest: Dwarven craftmasters are regarded as the most skilled in all the
Icelands, and the new overseer of a multi-settlement compact seeks a
ceremonial blade to act as a symbol of leadership. However, someone has
to make the long trek to Nidavellir and convince the dwarves to take
payment rather than lives from the messengers. What else have you heard
lies in a dwarven hall that you seek?
YOUR TRUTH
In the whole history of dwarven kind, only one dwarf has ever
returned to life after being turned to stone. Who was this
dwarf, and what were the circumstances of this miracle?
                                                        36
    FOSSEGRIM                                                     FIRSTBORN
    Rank:     Troublesome (3 progress per harm; inflicts 1 harm)
                    Water spirits that play a fiddle
    Features:       Music that mimics forest sounds
                    Moss-like hair and green skin
                    Cause mischief
    Drives:         Ensnare people with bargains
                    Expand the reach of waterways
                    Lure people in with the fiddle
    Tactics:        Grant wishes that follow the letter of the law and not
                     the spirit of it with outrageous conditions
    Sure, everyone wants their greatest wishes to come true, but you should
    never trust a fossegrim to do it. The fossegrim are capricious water spirits
    that enjoy making odd contracts with people to fulfill their wish once
    payment has been made. However, rare are the stories where this wish
    fulfillment has occurred in the way the wisher envisioned it. Most times,
    the wish being fulfilled only adds to the tragedy.
    Fossegrim like to frequent streams and waterways that widen around a
    small middle island where they can sit and play their fiddle. The music is
    like a siren's call to some, particularly the brokenhearted and desperate.
    The water imps are always courteous and give every indication that they
    will indeed fulfill a person's greatest wish. They promise it all will turn out
    exactly as they word their wish and warn to word it carefully. Because of
    this, there's always someone who thinks they have the words to outwit a
    fossegrim who goes to try their luck only to fail.
    Quest: A friend is caught in a no-win bargain with a fossegrim and is
    seeking your aid. Who are they to you, and what led them to such a terrible
    plan of action?
    YOUR TRUTH
    As a more primordial firstborn, the fossegrim have limited
    variety in their culture. However, what are some things that do
    notably vary from fossegrim to fossegrim that feeds the false
    hope that their wish-granting will work out for the best?
37 
GNOME                                                     FIRSTBORN
Rank:     Troublesome (3 progress per harm;  inflicts  1  harm)
            Small, cave-dwelling troll
Features:   Lanky frame, gaunt faces
            Counts treasure for hours
            Collect more treasures
Drives:     Avoid direct confrontation
            Defend their hoard
            Knife in the dark
Tactics:    Throw their voice to confuse
            Clutter the terrain
The gnomes are far more elemental creatures of darkness than the elves or
dwarves. They are closer in nature to the fossegrim in their single-
mindedness and focus on acquiring treasure-like objects. They obsess over
their newest treasures, talking to the objects and caressing them like a pet.
As creatures of a more primordial make-up, one might think the gnomes
stupid, but this is far from true. They can be motivated by treasure to act
as scouts, spies, and manipulators who are quite effective at their trade.
Some claim that this shows the gnomes as descendants not only of trolls
but of the god Loki.
Quest: Multiple objects had gone missing during the nights around the
settlement of Oakcrest before a small cave opening was discovered in the
nearby woods. The people think that gnomes may be responsible for the
thefts and want their things back, but they also know that the deep places
of the world are dangerous. They would likely be willing to let bygones be
bygones with the gnomes if they knew the gnomes would stop, but one
person lost something of true value: a ring of mystic power. What does this
ring have power over, and where did you cross paths with it once before?
YOUR TRUTH
Are gnomes good swimmers? Do they usually make their
homes in underground lakes?
                                                        38
    HULDRA                                                         FIRSTBORN
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
                    Seductive forest wardens
    Features:       Cow's tail and bark-covered back
                    Master of illusion
                    Keep victims as lovers
    Drives:         Drain life to sustain their own
                    Protect sacred natural places
                    Ensorcel and ensnare victims
    Tactics:        Compel victims to return even if they escape
                    Swift strikes from an ironroot staff
    The huldra truly are a sapient force of nature more than anything else.
    Their desires, thought process, and morality are so alien to our own that it
    is the very essence of chaos to interact with them. One moment they be a
    passionate lover and the next a cruel executioner dependent upon their
    whims and strange desires.
    What we know of these creatures is scant, but we believe they have the
    ability to drain the life energy from a living creature to sustain their own
    existence. Because they view themselves are guardians of nature itself,
    they rarely drain the life of plants or woodland animals. They by far prefer
    us, the Icelanders, for we are viewed as outsiders spoiling their domain.
    That and we make compatible lovers at least while we yet have life in us.
    From our viewpoint, the huldra are the ultimate hedonists and a grave
    danger. They cannot be reasoned with, cannot be taught to respect all
    forms of life, and only sometimes can be bargained with if something
    important enough catches their fancy. Be wary. If you see one beckon you
    deeper into the forest, it may already be too late for you.
    Quest: The huldra are said to be able to spin cloth from moonlight that is
    as strong as steel. A person who escaped the clutches of a huldra tells the
    tale that convincing the huldra to spin a shirt for them was the distraction
    they needed to escape, but now the shirt of moonlight haunts their dreams.
    Can the shirt be found without encountering the huldra? Why are you
    willing to try?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Are all huldra female?
39 
JOTNAR                                                                FIRSTBORN
Rank:     Extreme (2 ticks per harm; inflicts     4  harm)
                   Huge, blue-skinned brute
Features:          Insatiable hunger
                   Embodiment of chaos
                   Be impulsive
Drives:            Enjoy destruction
                   Eat, eat, and eat
                   Trap prey to eat later
Tactics:           Crush prey to eat now
                   Hurl boulders for fun
The jotnar are giant brutes who revel in chaos, turmoil, and strife. They
fight amongst themselves for pleasure and will destroy whole caravans
without taking any of the spoils just for the thrill of destruction.
The jotnar mostly inhabit the Jotunheim region and some of the southern
parts of Asgard. They are impervious to the cold in the Icelands and can
even be found out in the open during a snowstorm sleeping off a night's
revelry and entertainment. They have also been known to start avalanches
for fun and even ride them down the mountainside.
While the jotnar are not large enough to cause the region-wide earthquakes
that frequently occur in Jotunheim, one can understand how their
forebearers may have been large enough to do so.
Quest:An expedition toAsgard was cut short by a group of boulder tossing
jotnar. So accurate are their throws that some people were left alive with
appendages trapped under the boulders. The survivors are begging for
help as those who are still trapped may only have hours left before the cold
or their injuries kill them. That is, if the jotnar didn't come back. What
experience have you had with jotnar in the past that makes you feel
qualified to help?
YOUR TRUTH
Were the jotnar once a fuller and richer culture? If so, what
caused them to turn into the brutes they now are?
                                                          40
    LJOSALFAR                                                        FIRSTBORN
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
                Elves with masks of gold
    Features:   Egotistical and aloof to lesser lifeforms (humans)
                Can inflict or heal disease with but a touch
                Protect the natural order as they see it
    Drives:     Participate in revelry
                Archive ancient knowledge
                Avoid fights by weaving illusions
    Tactics:    Blind foes with their glowing masks
                Disarm, disable, and disappear
    At first glance, one might consider the Ljosalfar, or Gold Elves, as the
    "good" elves and the Dokkalfar as the "bad" elves, but this is a primitive
    view of the actual situation. It is true that the Ljosalfar are far less likely
    to kill you if you meet them in a dark section of the forest, but they can be
    just as ruthless if pushed. They do not grant outsiders access to their
    settlements easily, and they cavalierly enforce what they call the Laws of
    Nature with immediate death sentences for those who violate it.
    Their nightly revels are legendary for their extravagance and opulence, but
    they too are a trap. If an Icelander were to find their way to a nightly revel,
    they would be lost to the realm of mortals. We don't know if the revels are
    true events or merely part of the elves'illusory powers to trick us.
    The Ljosalfar wear masked forged from gold that are said to contain the
    essence of a single ray of sun cast through a facet of a great diamond set at
    the top of the tallest tree converted to a tower in their main settlement.
    These masks supposedly act as a focal point for their mysticism, and masks
    that we have found have also been used as foci for our mystics.
    Quest: A contingent of Ljosalfar say that the settlement of Eaglesham has
    encroached too far into the forest of the Alfheim. They have given the
    settlement until dusk tomorrow to remove the building frame recently
    erected and replace the trees that were felled there. If their instructions are
    not followed, Eaglesham is to be purged. Who do you know that may be
    able to regrow trees overnight? What will it take to get them to Eaglesham
    in time?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Each golden mask is inscribed with runes.       What do the runes
    proclaim about the wearer?
41               THE ICELANDS | BASED ON NORSE MYTHOLOGY
TROLL                                                        FIRSTBORN
Rank:      Formidable (1 tick per harm; inflicts 3 harm)
             Large, ugly forest dwellers
Features:    Low intelligence and highly malevolent
             Will cooperate for trinkets
Drives:      Eat, sleep, and collect things
             Avoid sunlight lest they be turned to stone
             Use torches as clubs
Tactics:     Intimidate and snarl
             Knock over trees
Like the dwarves, the cave trolls of the Icelands also turn to stone in the
sunlight. But where the dwarves provide exquisite craftsmanship, the
trolls only take. They are generally selfish and more animalistic in nature
leading them to take whatever they want if they are strong enough to do so.
Their thick skin acts as a natural armor, almost as if their skin is partially
turned to stone already. Their favorite strategy is wait in darkness, spark
the end of an explosively bright torch, and pummel their flash-blinded prey
with their flaming brand. They never worry about defending themselves as
they trust their own hides to protect them and know that they can
regenerate quickly.
If they are outdoors when they attack, they enjoy pushing whole trees down
on top of their opponents. Their strength can only be outmatched by a
jotnar, and their long arms give them a longer reach than any other.
Quest: Three trolls were said to be turned to stone as they argued over
which of their Icelander captives to eat first. Now the survivors of that
ordeal want to go back and hunt for the trolls'lair thinking they may find
some easy treasure, but the area is riddled with deep caves. What treasure
in particular did the trolls take from someone you know?
YOUR TRUTH
Myths tell of a troll enclave that is filled with peaceful,
intelligent, and gifted artisans. How did this clan of trolls come
about?
                                                         42
    DISIR                                                           HORROR
    Rank:      Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts  2 harm)
                 Female warrior spirits of cloud
    Features:    Single-minded focus
                 Can never truly be killed
                 Bound to protect sites of power
    Drives:      Eliminate the unworthy
                 Create more disir
                 Ghostly blades and armor
    Tactics:     Allows attacks to pass through their   incorporeal  form
                 Withering touch
    The disir are another example of the cruelty of the Ljosalfar. We believe
    these spectral warriors are ancestors of the elves set to guard their most
    sacred locations from all but the most devout. They generally attack on
    sight and cannot be dissuaded from their task. Our best weapon against
    them is that we can run away because they will not leave their site of power
    unguarded even for a moment.
    Those who are touched by a disir experience a withering of their flesh in
    that area. We call it the death touch. You can tell when someone has had
    an encounter with a disir and survived because of the necrotic pocks where
    the ghastly creatures touched them even if they were armored at the time.
    Quest: A new road is being built between two settlements but the route they
    chose passes near a site guarded by several disir. However, if they move
    the road further one direction, it will run through elven territory, and
    moving it the other direction would make it impassable due to a gorge.
    What makes this road needed so desperately? What makes you think you
    may be able to handle this with the least amount of bloodshed?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Are the disir always female?
    What qualities do they seek most urgently when creating new
    disir?
43                THE ICELANDS | BASED ON NORSE MYTHOLOGY
DRAUGAR                                                             HORROR
Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts        2  harm)
            Bloated, death-blue corpse
Features:   Can increase to giant size
            Immune to all but fire and iron
Drives:     Destroy the living
            Crush with their size
Tactics:    Swim through stone
            Drink the blood of victims
The draugar are corpses inhabited by spiteful spirits guarding their own
tomb or resting place. Usually the draugar are spawned when a particularly
greedy person is buried with a significant amount of their own treasure
which they then guard zealously. This is where we get the phrase, "Never
bury a king with his gold."
The draugar can increase their size at a moment's notice rivaling the stature
of a troll and somehow have the ability to shift through stone and earth
despite their corporeal nature. No one visits crypts anymore lest the arms
of a draugar reach through the wall and grab them followed by a deadly
bite when the draugar begins to suck their blood.
Luckily, we have found a reliable way to deal with draugar. If one can be
wrestled back to their own grave and held there while the words of power
are recited, their spirits can finally be put to rest. However, there are few
brave or foolish enough to take on a quest such as this.
Quest: Despite protestations from the citizens, the greedy overseer Hroarr
was buried in an extravagant ceremony. This was seen as a political move
on the part of the next overseer to pacify Hroarr's former henchmen. Now
the new overseer uses Hroarr's draugar as punishment for any who
"disappoint the old man." How do you know this new overseer? What
harm did they cause to you in the past?
YOUR TRUTH
Acult seeks to capture, study, and use draugar for their own
ends. Who is this cult, and what are their intentions?
                                                        44
    MARE                                                           HORROR
    Rank:      Troublesome (3 progress per harm; inflicts 1 harm)
    Features:    Roaming spirit detached from its living, sleeping body
                 Ethereal, lanky shape resembling the person
                 Feed off fear
    Drives:      Act out bad impulses that the person can't do while
                  they are awake
    Tactics:     Trap with ethereal vines
                 Attack another sleeping person in their dreams
    Mares comes from the word nightmare, but mares exist in the real world
    outside of the dreamer's mind. It is said that when a person's soul reaches
    the depths of apathy or hopelessness with life, the soul will stray from its
    body while the body sleeps. Have you awakened from a full night's rest
    that was undisturbed yet still feel bone-weary? Take stock of your life, for
    your soul may be turning into a mare.
    When a mare leaves its body, it wanders nearby trying to arouse fear in
    others which in turn feed its energy. The stronger the mare gets, the longer
    the person sleeps until eventually they don't wake up again.
    Beyond seeking out fear, the mares will often act out inappropriate
    behaviors that the person can't do while they are awake. The mare may
    harass a family member they find annoying, seek revenge on a former
    lover, or even cause pain and harm for fun.
    But not all is lost when a mare is formed for we know how to dissuade their
    reappearance: stories of valor and noble purpose. You need not a mystic if
    you have a troubled soul. You need a skald, a bard who can spin the yarns
    of faith, hope and love. This is is not only good for removing the threat of
    the mare but also for the person that formed the mare.
    Quest: The entire settlement of Springbrook believes that they each are
    projecting mares at night because it is taking them all longer and longer to
    wake up each morning. What tragedy befall this settlement to cause such
    a thing, or is a more sinister source to blame?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Do mares truly come and go each night as they increase in
    power, or is it that once a mare is created the physical body
    stays in a state of perpetual stasis?
45                THE ICELANDS | BASED ON NORSE MYTHOLOGY
VALKYRIE                                                         HORROR
Rank:     Formidable (1 progress per harm; inflicts 3 harm)
            Female warrior spirit of fire
Features:   Weapons and armor of flame
            Decide who dies in battle on a whim
            Use dead souls to weave fate
Drives:     Find and slay the best warriors
            Satiate bloodthirst
            Compel fumbled attacks
Tactics:    Scorch and super-heat weapons of foes
            Stretch out battles to increase their glory
At times the Valkyrie were lauded as positive protectors, but now that
we've seen them up close in the Icelands, we know better. The Valkyrie
are actually bloodthirsty warrior spirits wrapped in flames who seek
nothing but battle after battle and deaths beyond counting.
TheValkyrie are said to fly over significant battles and stir emotions to ever
higher frenzies. They seek out the mightiest warrior on the field and do
battle with that person themselves. Once theValkyrie are noted, it is wisest
for both sides of the battle to sue for peace immediately, but rarely does this
occur like it should.
Legend says that the reason the Valkyrie seek out so much death is because
they use the souls of the mightiest warriors to weave together specific
fabrics of fate that they then pass on to the Norn. And what would the
Valkyries want to be the destiny of the Icelands? More battles. More
death. More power for themselves.
We don't believe a Valkyrie can be truly killed, but there have been
warriors strong enough to best them in battle. When that happens, the fire
spirits flee and usually are not seen for weeks or even months.
Quest: The renowned warrior Torvald seeks to test his mettle against a
Valkyrie. To call forth the fiery spirits, he has gathered a small army to
march on a raider stronghold. Torvald believes he can best the Valkyrie
and help the people at the same time. You know something about the leader
of the raiders that Torvald does not. What is it, and how will it effect his
plan for battle poorly?
YOUR TRUTH
Are Valkyrie guided by some divine figure, or are they merely
the next in a long line of horrors?
