

COMBAT TALENT: STAFF LAEVATEINN
After you Fulfill Your Vow to be found worthy of Laevateinn, quest to find it, and wield it...
You may Strike or Clash +wits in melee or from a distance with this staff. If you do, it inflicts 1 harm as a blast of Laevateinn's necrotic energy saps the life of your foe. If your action die shows a 6, inflict an additional +1 harm.
When you Secure an Advantage +wits by unleashing a mystic burst from Laevateinn, envision how the power of death hinders others or affects the environment. Then, add +1 and take +1 momentum on a hit.
When you Face Danger +wits against a horror or servant of the dead leveraging Laevateinn's power over such creatures, add +1 and take +1 momentum on a hit.

COMBAT TALENT: SPEAR GUNGNIR
After you Fulfill Your Vow to be found worthy of Gungnir, quest to find it, and wield it...
When you Strike +edge by throwing Gungnir at a foe with mystical accuracy, add +1 and take +1 momentum on a hit as the spear's runes of blaze brightly.
When you Strike or Clash, you may decide before rolling to subtract -2 from the highest challenge die. If you do and miss, Endure Stress (1 stress) as Gungnir's power falters.
Once per battle when you Strike or Clash and miss, you may call on the power of Odin. If you do, you may reroll any dice.

COMBAT TALENT: DAGGER
SKOFNUNG
After you Fulfill Your Vow to be found worthy of Skofnung, quest to find it, and wield it, set your essence to +6 representing spiritual bodyguards in gems on the blade. When you draw your own blood and Endure Harm to honor those spirits, add +1 essence. When you use an ability below, roll +essence. On a strong hit, the ability occurs. On a weak hit, as above but Endure Stress (1 stress). On a miss, suffer the -essence and Pay the Price. Suffer -1 essence to gain the Kindred asset with Skilled and Shield-Kin upgrades until the next dawn.
Suffer -2 essence to gain the Cutthroat asset with all three upgrades unlocked until the next dawn.
O Suffer -3 essence. Gain the benefit of a strong hit on the Leech ritual's first ability.
0 +1 +2 +3 +4 +5 +6

COMBAT TALENT: HAMMER
MJOLNIR
After you Fulfill Your Vow to be found worthy of Mjolnir, quest to find it, and wield it...
When you Clash and score a weak hit, you may inflict no harm to knock your foe back with a clap of thunder. If you do, you have the initiative.
When you Strike and score a strong hit, you may call forth a blast of lightning. If you do, focus on the righteousness of your cause and roll +heart. On a hit, inflict X harm and take +X momentum. On a strong hit, X is 2. On a weak hit, X is 1.
When you End the Fight by slamming Mjolnir to the ground releasing a wave of lightning and thunder, subtract -1 from each challenge die. On a weak hit or miss, you suffer collateral damage in addition to the other consequences.

COMPANION: RAVENS
HUGIN AND MUNIN
Name:
Your ravens provide sight and insight.
O Fara ok Sja: When you Undertake a Journey to follow one marked by death or Gather Information about them by sending your ravens out to scry, you may roll +shadow (instead of +wits).
O Sala Sjon: When you Secure an Advantage by having your ravens gaze into a person's soul, roll +shadow. On a hit, you see one of that person's darkest fears. On a miss, Endure Stress (1 stress) from a chaotic vision of your own fears.
Doudar-Ord: When you Draw the Circle and choose To the death as a boast, take +2 momentum (instead of +1). In addition, take +2 momentum (instead of +1) when you Endure Harm and choose Embrace the pain during the battle.
0 +1 +2 +3

COMPANION
DIRE WOLF
Name:
Your wolf is a fierce warrior. O Hunter: When you Gather
Information using your wolf's keen senses to track your quarry, add +1 and take +1 momentum on a hit.
O Pack Tactics: When you Strike or Clash alongside your wolf, add +1 and take +1 momentum.
O Prey on the Weak: When you Strike along your wolf and score a hit against a foe with progress already marked, inflict +1 harm.
0 +1 +2 +3 +4

PATH: DISCIPLE OF LOKI
LIDI A LOKI
When you Face Danger, Secure an Advantage, or Compel through trickery or deceit, add +1 and take +1 momentum on a hit.
As above, but you may swap the value of your action die and the highest challenge die. If you do, the next time you make an action roll where any two dice have the same value, treat it as a miss with a match. You may not use this ability again until the miss with a match is resolved.
You may Sojourn +shadow (instead of +heart). If you do, add +1, and on a strong hit, choose one additional benefit and take +1 momentum. Treat a weak hit as a miss as they see through your lies. If you share a bond with the community, Test Your Bond.

PATH: DISCIPLE OF HEL
LIDI A HEL
When you hold a ceremony to commemorate the honored dead, roll +heart and add +1. On a hit, take +1 spirit and +1 momentum as you are heartened by their journey to Vahalla. On a miss, envision a new and discouraging truth about this loss and Endure Stress (1 stress). When you End the Fight by attempting to slay a sapient foe, you may reroll any dice. If you do and miss, Endure Stress (2 stress). When you Face Death, you may call upon the goddess Hel's power. If you do and your action die shows a 1, you die as your spirit is violently summoned to Hel. If your action die is 2 or more, you score a weak hit.

RITUAL: RAINBOW BRIDGE
BIFROST
• When you Undertake a Journey by summoning the Bifrost, roll +heart (instead of +wits). On a strong hit, mark progress twice. On a weak hit, as above but envision how the Bifrost draws unwanted attention.
When you use the magic of the Bifrost to Gather Information on a friend or ally in a distant place, roll +heart (instead of +wits). On a strong hit, you may briefly communicate with them. On a weak hit, they are only aware of your attempted communication.
When you attempt to pull a willing friend or ally in a distant location to you through the Bifrost, roll +heart and change any challenge die below 5 to a 5. On a strong hit, you succeed. On a weak hit, they appear at a nearby precarious spot or suffer in some way during transit.

PATH: DISCIPLE OF THOR
LIDI A THOR
When you Face Danger to protect an innocent or one you have sworn a vow to or to overcome an obstacle with an uncanny feat of strength, add +1 and take +1 momentum on a hit.
When you spend a night in ceremony to hallow ground, call forth the abundance of the earth, or bless the fertility of a union, roll +heart and add +1. On a hit, envision the successful effect of this blessing and take +1 momentum. If you are within a community, you may immediately Forge a Bond. If you do, add +1.
O When you Secure an Advantage by calling on the power of the storm, roll +heart and add +1. On a hit, envision how the storm manifests

RITUAL: EXHORT THE FATES
SEIDHR
When you perform a ceremony to send your spirit to the foot of Yggdrasil to consult the Norn sisters of fate, roll +wits. On a strong hit, take +2 momentum and gain insight into an event that centers on a person, place, or object of power from the chosen time period below. One time only, when you leverage this knowledge, add +2. • Past
O Present O Future
On a weak hit, as above but choose one: The Norn demand a tribute of blood. Endure Harm (2 harm).
The Norn demand a sacrifice of something precious to you. Endure Stress (2 stress).
The Norn set you on a fated path. Swear an Iron Vow to fulfill a quest given to you by the Norn.