    NEW FOES
    The foes of the Junglelands shy away from horrors not because there are
    no ghost-like legends in SouthAmerican but because many of those stories
    fit the categories in Ironsworn better as animals or beasts than horrors.
    This is not to say you can't have horrors in the Junglelands. You absolutely
    can and should, but the core Ironsworn horrors will fit just as well.
    Additionally, there are three Mother Snakes included as firstborn who were
    considered deities by some SouthAmerican cultures. While they are close
    to that status in the Junglelands as well, I set them to be firstborn (rather
    than beast) to demonstrate their ancient lineage and sapience. They truly
    were the first inhabitants of the Junglelands by virtue of helping to create
    it. While these beings have a more positive bent to them in their
    descriptions here than in their real-world equivalents, it would still be
    possible to find your character at odds with them or needing to prove your
    worth to them. Therefore, they are included as foes in case you want to
    have them physically (not just mystically) in your game sessions.
    Furthermore, there are a few Mesoamerican foes listed. With such an
    overlap between some of the types of foes (particularly, the sheer volume
    of mythological snakes from SouthAmerica and Mesoamerica!), I thought
    they best fit the flavor of the SouthAmerica set. Specifically, theAhuizotl,
    Camazotz, and Quetzalcoatl are more Mesoamerican in origin but fit the
    idea of the Junglelands really well.
26  THE JUNGLELANDS | BASED ON SOUTH AMERICAN MYTHOLOGY
AHUIZOTL                                                        ANIMAL
Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
            Large, blue and black wolf
Features:   Fur that mats to create deadly spikes
            Tail with a clawed hand-like appendage
            Track and hunt with the pack
Drives:     Den in flooded areas
            Howl at the moon
            Pounce and rake
Tactics:    Tail attack
            Bite and claw
As if being hunted by a pack of wolves was not enough, the Junglelands
also have packs of aquatic wolves. The ahuizotl wolves live near lakes or
rivers and spend close to half their waking hours in the water. Their feet
are slightly larger with webbed toes making them exceptional swimmers.
While the ahuizotl share most of the same characteristics with their regular
wolf cousins, these wolves have two distinctions.
First, their black and blue fur grows together in large spiky mats that then
strengthen into the same consistency as their claws, This effectively gives
them a layer of spiked armor making them more difficult to capture alive.
Secondly, they have a three-fingered appendage (two fingers and a thumb)
at the end of their tail that we refer to as a hand for lack of a better word.
They can use this hand to grasp and manipulate items such as a haunch of
meat or branches for building a den. They can also use this tail-hand as a
method of attack if they have their prey held on the ground.
Quest: The river village of Boraba has been trying to rebuild since the
river flooded over half the settlement. Many buildings were lost during the
flood and some are still submerged as the river seems to have permanently
claimed part of the land. A pack of ahuizotl have moved into one such
submerged house and now terrorize the populace by killing off the few
livestock of the village. Why are the people of Boraba unwilling to kill
these ahuizotl despite the damage they inflict?
YOUR TRUTH
Is there a burrowing version of the ahuizotl?      If so, what
unique characteristic do they have?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                         27
    CUERO                                                              ANIMAL
    Rank:          Troublesome (3 progress per harm; inflicts 1 harm)
                     Giant stingray with eye stalks
    Features:        Extremely flat, black and white body
                     Claws at the front and hooks on underbelly
                     Swim in deep rivers
    Drives:          Swim upstream to mate
                     Hunt and eat anything
                     Wrap around victim
    Tactics:         Spin and serrate with claws
                     Lie still on the river bed to surprise
    The "Floating Cowhide" creature certainly looked laughable, but the first
    time one wrapped its flat body around a Junglelander who was trying to get
    water from the river, we knew it was no laughing matter. That person
    escaped with their life due to the quick thinking of a bystander, but not all
    are so lucky.
    A cuero usually hunts alone, gliding on the river currents attracting prey
    with its black and white splotched body. After wrapping up a victim in its
    body, it will begin to spin rapidly around the victim slicing them up with
    its many bony hooks on its underbelly. It can also attack by spinning itself
    so that its own body is wrapped up to the size of a spear and then fling itself
    at its prey using its front claws as the spear head.
    Despite their bold coloring with bright white spots, they can be difficult to
    see in the muddy river waters of the Junglelands. We tried plunging spears
    or sticks into the water before we entered a river in order to chase the cuero
    away, but we have found that doing so only announces our presence. If
    refilling a water skin or gathering jugs of water is necessary, get into and
    back out of the river as fast as possible for the cuero never stop their hunt.
    Quest:Amystic claims that they will gain control over the element of water
    through a long and complex ritual. However, they need to perform the
    ritual inside of a tent made of cuero hide. What other entity lurks in the
    deep river waters nearby that must also be dealt with?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Are all cuero black and white, or do they have different
    colorations? If they have variety, what purpose does this
    serve?
28  THE JUNGLELANDS | BASED ON SOUTH AMERICAN MYTHOLOGY
IX HUNPEDZKIN                                                      ANIMAL
Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm;      inflicts  2  harm)
            Gila monster sized lizard
Features:   Poisonous bite and skin
            Deadly scorpion tail
            Hunt for food
Drives:     Sun on the rocks
            Usurp homes as its shelter
            Paralyzing tail strike
Tactics:    Poison bite
            Leave a trail of poison
While it is true that nearly every creature from the jungles can kill you, the
reptiles of the jungles are especially deadly. The ix hunpedzkin is no
exception to this. It is a large lizard with impossibly tough skin that not
only delivers poison through its bite but also through its stinger at the end
of a long, scorpion-like tail.
As a top tier scavenger species, the ix hunpedzkin prefers to take advantage
of the work of other creatures when it can. It scares away lesser predators
to steal their kills and finds dens or lairs of other animal to take as its own.
Unfortunately, this also includes our own homes. Once an ix hunpedzkin
finds a settlement, it will usually pick out a building or structure to call its
home and drive out or kill those inside. Once entrenched, these stubborn
creatures are nearly impossible to flush out.
Our main advantage when hunting ix hunpedzkin is that its height only
comes up to a Junglelander's waist. While this makes them a huge lizard,
a group of our hunters is usually able to surround and kill one with
overwhelming numbers.
Quest: An ix hunpedzkin just took up residence in a home minutes ago. An
infant is still inside and is in immediate danger. Can the infant be saved?
YOUR TRUTH
What unique and unusual markings do ix hunpedzkin have?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                           29
    JARJACHA                                                    ANIMAL
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
                Large quadruped with brown fur
    Features:   Long neck and glowing yellow eyes
                Flat face with a circular maw
                Hunt monkeys in the trees
    Drives:     Proclaim its territory with a call of "Jar, jar, jar, jar!"
                Take long naps standing up
                Knock limbs out of trees
    Tactics:    Track by smell
                Bull rush and knock down
    Some may describe the jarjacha as cute or innocent looking when they first
    see one, but they learn the truth as soon as this colorful and furry creature
    opens its circular mouth of jagged teeth. It looks like a purple and blue
    furred giraffe that a child might have a doll of, but the jarjacha is a hunter
    who has developed a very specific taste for monkeys.
    The jarjacha's long neck allows it to reach the treetops with ease. It will
    smell for large quantities of monkey droppings and then go towards the
    trees in that area with its head and neck lowered toward the ground. This
    makes the monkeys think they are safe high up in the trees. Then the
    jarjacha swiftly thrusts its head up cracking and knocking down branches
    and possibly knocking monkeys out of the tree as well.
    The most disturbing thing about the jarjacha is the sound that it makes: a
    high-pitched, almost human voice saying "Jar, jar, jar, jar!" The word
    always comes in sets of four and is not the only sound that it can make.
    Some have been known to mimic human speech much like a parrot, but the
    tone of its voice can give you nightmares.
    Quest: The howler monkeys have been particularly vocal the past few days,
    and the overseer thinks this is a sign of a herd of jarjacha moving into the
    area. If there are jarjachas, the overseer needs them eliminated as there is
    only one safe path to this settlement that must remain open for supplies and
    trade. What makes you think the jarjacha is only the beginning of the
    problem?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Do the jarjacha have horns?
30  THE JUNGLELANDS | BASED ON SOUTH AMERICAN MYTHOLOGY
KORI                                                                    ANIMAL
Rank:      Troublesome (3 progress per harm;  inflicts        1  harm)
              Aquatic anteater
Features:     Sickly green fur
              Spiked tail used to dig
              Build dams to flood areas
Drives:       Eat gigantic insects
              Defend its territory
              Impale with spikes
Tactics:      Swim to safety
              Stay hidden in the shallows
Kori are not extremely dangerous unless they are provoked. They are
naturally non-aggressive and usually go about their day in relative ease and
quiet, but this confidence on their part is due to the fact that they know they
can handle most threats with a whack of their saw-like tail.
The bigger threat from the kori is flooding or waterways being rerouted as
they dig pathways for the water and build their den. Much like beavers,
they prefer flooded lands as homes but have been known to change the
course of small rivers to accommodate their housing preferences rather
than building where the river currently runs. They will start digging a
trench at the site where they want their new home to be and dig that trench
all the way back to a water source. This sends water rushing to the new
area but gives it no outlet thereby making it a flooded and stagnant area.
Quest: The stream used by a local settlement as a water source has nearly
dried up. It is suspected that a family of kori moved in further upstream,
and the overseer needs someone to go get the stream back on course and
make sure it is not bothered again by the kori. What unusual thing was
revealed when the stream waters dropped so rapidly, and why is it an ill
omen for you?
YOUR TRUTH
The kori eat ants and other insects. What unusual aquatic
insects are their favorite? How are these insects dangerous to
the Junglelanders?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                          31
    PIRA NU                                                          ANIMAL
    Rank:     Troublesome (3 progress per harm; inflicts  1  harm)
                Big, black fish with horse head
    Features:   Thick, rock hard skull
                Over-sized teeth
                Feed on mammals
    Drives:     Swim at great speeds
                Make homes in the rapids
                Use the rapids to their advantage
    Tactics:    Ram boats to tip them
                Knock unconscious and then bite
    The buck-toothed pira nu fish may not seem as deadly as the piranha that
    inhabit most waterways, but the pira nu are actually worse. Their thick
    skulls and large heads that look similar to a horse combine with their
    extreme speed in the water to make an excellent battering ram. They can
    break your leg bones if you are standing in the water and knock over
    canoes to dump you in the river.
    Their teeth are flat for grinding the blood out of flesh. Rather than tearing
    the flesh apart, they have the bite force to break bones through the skin.
    They especially target smaller appendages such as fingers and toes which
    they can crush with a single bite. As they grind the blood from their prey,
    the normal piranha are attracted making a problem doubly worse.
    Quest: A small waterhole has been overrun with pira nu. A priest wants to
    use the spot for divine ceremonies but needs to be able to safely get into the
    water. What was this area before the flood came that created this
    waterhole? What might the priest really be after?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Are pira nu actually the piranha of your world? In other
    words, do they have jagged teeth instead of flat grinders, and
    are they known for their feeding frenzies?
32  THE JUNGLELANDS | BASED ON SOUTH AMERICAN MYTHOLOGY
QUETZALCOATL                                                ANIMAL
Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
            Green and red feathery serpent
Features:   Large fangs to deliver a huge dose of venom
            Blue feathered rings on the tail
            Hunt predator birds
Drives:     Sun in trees
            Build protective nests like a bird
            Poisonous bite
Tactics:    Fly-by attack
            Drop from above
Legend says that the colorful parrots of the jungles once put on such a
dance for Huayramama the Snake Mother of Wind that her next clutch of
serpent children were given the bright plumage of the parrots in their
honor. Whether that is true or not, the quetzalcoatl are normal-sized snakes
that still have the colorful green and red feathers along with wings they use
to fly. While the wings on their own couldn't hold the awkward writhing
snake aloft, the bright blue feathers on their tails act as a fan and rudder
giving them the appearance of swimming through the sky.
As with many animals that the Snake Mothers created in the Junglelands,
the quetzalcoatl are poisonous and quite deadly. They are known to hunt
hawks, and even eagles, entangling them in the sky before striking with
their lethal venom. As they both tumble toward the earth, the snake
quickly unravels from its prey which then plummets to the ground below.
If the fall doesn't kill the bird, the poison will within minutes. The
quetzalcoatl will usually fly their kills back up to their nests before
dismembering the bird to eat it one body part at a time.
Quest: Quetzalcoatl feathers are highly prized as a mark of stature in
headdresses and as powerful foci for rituals. Despite a single bite being
lethal to a Junglelander, one hunter has survived more than five bites over
the years. How do you suspect this hunter survived those encounters, and
why do you need their knowledge and skill?
YOUR TRUTH
Do the quetzalcoatl have legs?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                        33
    ROMSIWAMNARI                                                           ANIMAL
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts           2  harm)
                Large, flabby, flightless bird
    Features:   Shriveled bat-like leathery wings
                Razor sharp scissor beak
                Hide in caves
    Drives:     Scavenge the dead
                Perpetually sharpen beak on rocks
                Cut off appendages
    Tactics:    Frighten with eerie whistle
                Batter with bony wings
    Grotesque is perhaps the best word to describe a romsiwamnari. They look
    like a cross between a rhea, a bat, and a pelican if the large pelican beak
    was a pair of lethal blades instead. Their flabby, gray skin is oily, and the
    calls that they make sound like a person drowning in sticky syrup.
    Aromsiwamnari never attacks to kill but to maim. They look for any thin-
    boned appendage on their prey such as a wing, arm, or leg which they can
    usually sever in a single strike. Once their prey is down with one of these
    lethal wounds, they proceed to take off the other appendages before eating
    the meaty torso. The concept of a mercy killing was not in our vocabulary
    until we met the romsiwamnari. Now we know it is a mercy to end the life
    of a fallen comrade before the evil bird finishes its work.
    Quest: A hunter lost their arm to a romsiwamnari but survived the
    encounter. Thanks to their determination and will to not only survive but
    thrive, they are still one of the top hunters in the area. This hunter now
    wants to track down the romsiwamnari that took their arm and seeks a
    companion to bear witness to their vengeance while not interfering. Who
    is this hunter to you, and can you really agree to not interfere if they are in
    danger?
    YOUR TRUTH
    The romsiwamnari are considered companions to what horror?
34  THE JUNGLELANDS | BASED ON SOUTH AMERICAN MYTHOLOGY
WAKO                                                               ANIMAL
Rank:      Troublesome (3 progress per harm; inflicts 1     harm)
             Spotted paca with long fangs
Features:    Size of a large dog
             Thick front claws
             Dig more and more tunnels
Drives:      Feed on travelers
             Have large families
             Burrow below to create small sinkholes
Tactics:     Lure into tunnels and trap
             Claw and bite
Wako are the larger cousins of the paca who love to dig in the soft earth
near waterways. Like their cousins, they are excellent swimmers and often
stay submerged for fifteen minutes or longer to avoid predators. The main
differences between the wako and the paca are the larger size, sharper teeth,
and clawed feet they use for digging.
While normally not aggressive, a wako will fight fiercely if they are
cornered. They also are known to be mischievous hunters as they will
create pitfall type traps by undermining a game trail or pathway so that
their prey fall and break a leg.
They have also been known to dig elaborate tunnel systems that are large
enough for some predators such as jaguars or wolves to fit inside. They
will then feign being injured to lure the predator in where either the tunnels
collapse or the predator gets hopelessly lost underground.
Quest: A family of wako had riddled an area with tunnels for years, and
one large section of ground finally gave way beneath a group of hunters.
While the hunters survived the encounter with few lasting injuries, they did
discover a much larger cave system that the wako exposed. What did they
see down there that has the whole settlement in a panic?
YOUR TRUTH
Like their paca cousins, wako young have horn-like scales
along their torso. Do these scales fall off after adolescence like
the pacas or do they enlarge and harden giving the wako even
more protection? If the spines remain, increase the rank of a
wako to Dangerous.
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                         35
    BOIUNA                                                            BEAST
    Rank:         Epic (1 tick per harm; inflicts 5 harm)
                     Miles long snake
    Features:        Glowing eyes
                     Lower fangs that go through the upper jaw
                     Submerge in deep rivers
    Drives:          Build fish populations for food
                     Hibernate for months or years
                     Swallow whole
    Tactics:         Suck in great quantities of water to trap many  prey
                     Create river tidal waves with its huge body
    While it may seem odd to say, a mile long serpent is not unheard of in the
    Junglelands. What is unusual about the god-sized snake Boiuna is that it
    doesn't live in the oceans but in the river Mayu Wanu. We don't know
    exactly how long Boiuna is, but there have been simultaneous reports of
    attacks by Boiuna's tail at one river settlement and by Boiuna's head at the
    next settlement.
    As far as we can tell, Boiuna draws in huge amounts of river water and then
    filters its meals almost like a whale with krill. As large as this beast is, you
    may think that the river has no other life in it because Boiuna eats it all, but
    this is not so. Legend says, and experience has confirmed, that Boiuna is
    an intelligent hunter and will transport whole schools of fish from one
    section of the river to the next in order to keep the population density at a
    steady norm.
    Some claim that Boiuna may be one of the lost Father Snakes, companion
    to the three Mother Snake god-like creatures, but according to our mystics
    there does not appear to be anything otherworldly about Boiuna. It has no
    mystical energy or abilities. It's just a snake big enough to swallow small
    settlements whole. That's all.
    Quest: Boiuna had not been seen in several years along the river Mayu
    Wanu until a few weeks ago. A shaman believes they have developed a
    concoction that can put Boiuna back into a hibernating state and thereby
    keep the river safe for a few more years. The problem: the boat-sized dose
    must be delivered straight into the maw of Boiuna.
    YOUR TRUTH
    Which cult worships Boiuna as a deity, and what part of their
    religious practices presents a danger to the populace?
36  THE JUNGLELANDS | BASED ON SOUTH AMERICAN MYTHOLOGY
FALAJITAX                                                       BEAST
Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
            Person-sized snake body
Features:   Head of a long-necked bird
            Tough, scaly skin
            Guard eintykara honey
Drives:     Protect its young
            Hunt for meat
            Hide its snake body pretending to be rheas
Tactics:    Attack during torrential rain to drown victims in floods
            Constrict with their tail and peck at the eyes to blind
With the head of a rhea on the body of a fat snake, a falajitax sounds like a
laughable combination, but their sharp beaks, cunning minds, and
muscular tails make them a dangerous creature. Growing to a length as
long as any Junglelander is tall, falajitaxes attack with a ferocity likely
induced by the hallucinogenic eintykara honey they guard and feed on.
When on the hunt, a falajitax feigns being a wandering rhea while keeping
its tail hidden in the jungle undergrowth. If it can draw in a large predator
animal, it then attempts to quickly constrict the creature with its tail while
it pecks at the eyes. Once its prey is blinded in this way, it then moves on
to attack the leg joints so that the creature cannot escape. Even the mighty
jaguar can fall prey to a falajitax.
There are those who believe that the falajitaxes have some innate control
over the weather because they prefer to attack during the most torrential
downpours, but more likely they are simply opportunistic.
Quest: A nest of freshly hatched falajitax young has infested the nearby
hunting grounds. Can the creatures be dealt with before they eliminate all
the game in the area? Who do you know in the nearby settlement that
would be in danger if this were to happen?
YOUR TRUTH
Are falajitaxes truly a rhea and snake combination, or do they
have the head and neck of a different creature in your world?
If they do, what creature's head do they have, and how does
that make them even more dangerous?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                         37
    OKPE                                                               BEAST
    Rank:      Formidable (1 progress per harm;  inflicts  3  harm)
                 Cow-sized boar
    Features:    Stone tusks
                 Pink and gray mottled skin of  rock
                 Prey on the young
    Drives:      Protect its territory
                 Expand its territory
                 Charge and ram
    Tactics:     Pierce with tusks
                 Drag victims to its lair
    Kings, warriors, and paupers have all fallen to the tusk of a wild boar. The
    creatures are aggressive in their berserker-like attacks and never back
    down when challenged. Now add to that idea a muscular body that is as
    large as a cow and rocky skin that acts like a suit of armor. This is the okpe.
    The creatures are omnivores and enjoy eating truffles or mushrooms as
    much as they enjoy eating freshly slain prey. The important thing to note
    about this is that the creatures seem to revel in eating any chance they get,
    but they love the tender meat of young prey the best. This drive for food
    is one of the few weaknesses that we can exploit when hunting an okpe.
    Perhaps because their rocky skin is so impenetrable, okpe have several
    inch-thick lines of unarmored flesh which allow them to move freely.
    Without these, the okpe could not move its own legs or rotate its head.
    That's how firm and inflexible their rocky armor is. However, the lines of
    pink flesh that allow them to move also give us their one vulnerable spot.
    Quest: The overseer of a large and influential settlement was gored by an
    okpe while out on the last hunt. When this overseer dies from their wounds,
    the power vacuum may destabilize the area. Factions are already vying for
    leadership and gearing up for battle. Which person do you support as the
    new overseer, and what makes them the underdog for this position?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Are the legends true that there is a rare subspecies of okpe
    called ember boars that can expel fire?
38  THE JUNGLELANDS | BASED ON SOUTH AMERICAN MYTHOLOGY
RAHARA                                                             BEAST
Rank:     Formidable (1 progress per harm; inflicts 3 harm)
            Large snake the length of four or five Junglelanders
Features:   Muddy brown body with the girth of a large pine tree
            Nightmarish long teeth make up the head with no eyes
            Cool off in the mud
Drives:     Feed on fresh meat
            Keep lagoons full of water
            Follow fires to find meat
Tactics:    Rush out from their tunnels for surprise attacks
            Knock down and bite
There are so many serpent-like creatures in the Junglelands, and they are
all deadly. The rahara is is a very long and thick serpent whose head is
made up almost entirely of its jaws. It has no eyes, just more teeth the
length of a Junglelander's forearm.
The raharas like to dig themselves into the mud and wait for prey to pass
close by. We're not sure how they breath while in this position, but they
have been known to stay submerged this way for hours at a time.
Moreover, we don't know how they detect creatures passing by. It may be
a sense of vibrations in the ground, or it could be sound that they follow.
We know that they have some sort of visual or heat sense because they can
latch onto campfires at night from a great distance and often surprise
sleeping Junglelanders. Because of this, it is advisable to sleep far away
from the fire pit or up in a hammock strung between trees.
Quest: A rahara attacked the pigsty of a farmer, decimating the livestock
and livelihood of the farmer's family. They are seeking someone to help
them eliminate the rahara while its hunger is satiated before it kills the few
remaining animals the farmer has.
YOUR TRUTH
It is considered taboo to kill a rahara during a drought because
a lagoon or pond never dries up with a rahara in it. Do they
have some innate power over water or merely the instinct to
find the best source of mud and water?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                         39
    TOSETAX                                                           BEAST
    Rank:     Extreme (2 ticks per harm; inflicts 4 harm)
                       Enormous, thick snake folded into a V shape
    Features:          Mouth at both ends and the center
                       Colorful rings of solid muscle
                       Devour all in its path
    Drives:            Track prey
                       Sleep in dark places
                       Knock down trees
    Tactics:           Surround and engulf
                       Crush with its great weight
    The tosetax is a frighteningly large snake that folds itself into a V that puts
    its tail in the same direction as its head. From this position, the tosetax can
    more quickly devour its prey because it has a great toothy maw on both its
    tail and its head.
    When first attempting to kill a tosetax, we thought we could sneak up
    behind it and attack the vulnerable part of the V-shaped body right at the
    folding point. Unfortunately, the beast has a third mouth there as well, and
    each mouth is capable of striking independently despite it only having eyes
    on its head. Whether lashing out with these three jaws of death or knocking
    down whole trees on top of its victims, it is a rare event that a group of
    hunters can take down a tosetax.
    Other than eating is fill, we can find no discernible pattern to a tosetax's
    behavior. At times, they live in watery environments near a river, but they
    are also found in the rocky hills leading to the mountains. Some tosetax
    seem to develop a taste for typical prey animals while others hunt
    exclusively other predators or even people. Whatever their motivations,
    tosetax are deadly and best avoided if possible.
    Quest: Years ago an enormous tosetax destroyed an area of the jungle
    creating a huge pile of trees and earth that is now home to a pack of
    smaller and never before seen creatures. What are these creatures, and
    what makes them dangerous?
    YOUR TRUTH
    When a tosetax experiences a grievous wound, what does it do?
    Does it grow a new mouth in that place, or does it sever its own
    body in two with each part regrowing into a whole tosetax?
40  THE JUNGLELANDS | BASED ON SOUTH AMERICAN MYTHOLOGY
CAIMANA                                                            FIRSTBORN
Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts    2  harm)
                  Green skinned alligator humanoids
Features:         Adept swimmers
                  Powerful toothed jaws
                  Grow and eat rice
Drives:           Find their soul mate
                  Keep outsiders away
                  Clamp, roll, and drown opponents
Tactics:          Attack from the water
                  Act like a floating log
The scant evidence of firstborn that we have found in the ancient places of
the Junglelands points to a group of firstborn who are humanoid alligators.
Surprisingly, most of these ancient records seem to be poetry, and romantic
poetry at that. We can only assume that the Caimana people placed great
cultural importance to the finding of a mate and falling in love.
Despite their penchant for love, the only encounters we have had with
Caimana have been deadly. If they are not the mad ravings of survivors of
deadly animal attacks, the Caimana must be extremely isolationist from the
rest of the Junglelands. The survivors of supposed Caimana attacks speak
of larger than life alligators and a frenzy of blood, but this is true with many
encounters near the waterways and doesn't necessarily mean that the
Caimana are real.
It is true that we have found rice patties growing in unusual places which
is said to be the staple food of the alligator folk, but we have yet to find or
interact with a living Caimana.
Quest: A powerful creature rules the waterways near a settlement, and the
overseer believes that an alliance with the Caimana would help them
eliminate this monster. There have been multiple sightings of the Caimana
people in this region, but nothing has been confirmed. Why are you willing
to go on this wild goose chase for a people who may not exist?
YOUR TRUTH
According to legend, what unusual ceremony do the Caimana
hold when a child hatches from their egg?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                           41
    CAMAZOTZ                                                        FIRSTBORN
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm;          inflicts  2  harm)
                Flying bat folk
    Features:   Light gray mottled fur
                Echolocation via screams
                Revel in night hunts
    Drives:     Bond with their pack
                Remember the old ways
                Wind buffet and claw
    Tactics:    Attack from the shadows
                Fly-by attacks
    The flapping of leathery wings overhead in the middle of the night is
    usually enough to put someone on edge. Now imagine hearing that sound,
    but slightly deeper, and realizing that whatever is flying over your head is
    much larger than a bat. This may be the last and only sound a Junglelander
    hears before a Camazotz warrior takes their life.
    The Camazotz are bat-like humanoids who generally value holding closely
    to their ancient traditions. They eschew metal weapons for wooden spears,
    bows, or macuahuitls. All metals are considered sacred to them and are
    only used in ceremonial trappings such as necklaces, headdresses, or arm
    bracers. All of their daily use items are either wooden or ceramic pottery.
    Perhaps the most frightening characteristic of the Camazotz is their
    echolocation screams. While they can use this ability quietly, during battle
    they scream like a banshee. The reason for this may be practical such as
    being able to hear the echoes more clearly allowing quicker reaction time,
    but it may also be to inspire fear.
    Quest: The settlement of Dula recently cleared a small patch of the local
    forest only to find out that the Camazotz considered the area sacred
    ground. Chinpokusi, the overseer of Dula, has made offers of recompense
    and is attempting to replant the area, but the Camazotz have not found any
    offer satisfactory. Can violence be avoided?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Do the Camazotz people have wings on the back of their
    shoulders separate from their arms, or are their wings attached
    directly to their arms? What implications does this have for
    the weapons that they wield?
42  THE JUNGLELANDS | BASED ON SOUTH AMERICAN MYTHOLOGY
EINTYKARA                                                   FIRSTBORN
Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
            Hivemind of large bees
Features:   Colony can work together as a humanoid shape
            Mustard yellow fur and maroon exoskeleton
            Produce hallucinogenic honey
Drives:     Protect the forests/jungles
            Enlarge their colony
            Swarm to blind opponents
Tactics:    Rapidly switch between swarm and humanoid form
            Inject victim with honey extract
One of the strangest people of the Junglelands, if people is even the right
word, are the Eintykara who are a group of large bees that can work in such
concert that they are able to form a humanoid shape and fight, work, and
communicate as a normal human would. Their voice is made up of various
buzzing sounds that work together at just the right frequency to produce
close to normal sounding speech.
Each hive of Eintykara refer to themselves as a single organism, and
actions that are taken by separate groups within the hive are carried out
without any visible or audible signal that we are aware of. It's as if they
have a direct line of communication with each other within their minds.
We call this the hivemind, one being made of many.
The honey produced by the Eintykara is sought out not only for its nutrition
and exquisite taste but also because it is mildly hallucinogenic. Some
shaman seek out this honey to mix with the ayahuasca plant when
embarking on vision quests to hear from the ancestors.
Quest: A Junglelander claims to have fallen in love with an Eintykara hive
and says that they are to bonded to one another. Ajealous former lover has
sworn to kill the Eintykara hive and set out to do so. What causes you to
approve of this strange union, and what ulterior motive do you believe the
jealous lover has to visit death upon the Eintykara?
YOUR TRUTH
When the Eintykara form into their humanoid guise, how
seamless is their appearance? Are the individual bees still
visible, or do they have a milky white skin like wax and yellow
hair like their fur?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                       43
    HUAYRAMAMA                                                FIRSTBORN
    Rank:     Epic (1 tick per harm; inflicts 5 harm)
                Mother Snake of the Wind
    Features:   Old woman face with long hair
                Gargantuan length
                Protect the skies
    Drives:     Seek out those worthy of her healing powers
                Continue changing creation
                Gale force wind blasts
    Tactics:    Lightning strikes and blinding rain
                Dodge like the wind despite her bulk
    The Mother Snake of the Wind is a deity figure credited with creating the
    wind to bring forth rain on the Junglelands so that it might grow and
    prosper. However, this deity is clearly visible and physically present in the
    world. She wanders the realms so high in the sky she looks like a tiny, thin
    cloud with her white and blue skin undulating.
    While contact with Huayramama is exceedingly rare, there are stories of
    Junglelanders receiving a blessing from her that healed them of an
    incurable disease. These same stories say that the Mother Snake can
    communicate mind to mind with any creature in the Junglelands and can
    soothe one who is pain with just her voice.
    However, don't think that Huayramama is only benevolent. The most
    severe lightning storms are ascribed to her as a punishment for abusing
    birds of the air or other members of nature. During these storms, huge
    lightning strikes cause raging fires despite the blinding rain. It is said that
    the smoke from these fires act as a cleansing offering to the skies and
    appease the Mother Snake.
    Quest: A friend and ally has a fatal wound that will fester and kill them
    slowly over the next weeks. A local shaman cannot contain the infection
    and says that the only way to get healing is to prove your worth to
    Huayramama and ask for her mercy in healing your friend. What feat
    might you perform to demonstrate your worth, and what guilt do you
    secretly harbor that endangers your quest?
    YOUR TRUTH
    What is the legendary resting place of Huayramama where she
    is said to sleep for a day and a year?
44  THE JUNGLELANDS | BASED ON SOUTH AMERICAN MYTHOLOGY
MUNUANE                                                           FIRSTBORN
Rank:          Formidable (1 progress per harm; inflicts 3 harm)
                 Tall, blue-skinned troll
Features:        Stone skin, turtle beak mouth
                 Eyes on knees instead of head
                 Walk the jungle waterways
Drives:          Protect the fish
                 Attract many mates
                 Unerring attacks with bow and arrows
Tactics:         Curse weakened victims to turn into insects
                 Lie in wait on makeshift rafts
The Munuane are a strange blue-skinned troll people with a very large
turtle-like beak on their head, stony skin, and eyes located on their knees
instead of their head. They are said to have been cursed byYacumama, the
Mother Snake of the Water, for over-hunting the waterways of the
Junglelands.      Yacumama said they needed to see things from the
perspective of the fish and moved their eyes to their knees.
Despite the odd placement of their visual sensory organs, they are
exceptional shots with a bow and arrow. They have long, gangling arms
that allow them to put the bows in eye-sight below their waist, and there is
something about this lower eye-level that allows them to judge distances
much better.
In addition to their prowess with the bow, the Munuane also retain some of
the mystical power of Yacumama in that they are able to pass on a curse of
their own. When in a battle with a Junglelander or another firstborn, the
Munuane will first wound their opponent with several arrows in places that
won't kill immediately, and then once their opponent nears death from
blood loss, they curse their victim to become an insect and live out their
days as such.
Quest: A parent claims to have seen their child cursed by a Munuane to
become an insect. A powerful shaman believes the curse can be reversed
but only with the right ingredients and only if the child can be found in
insect form. What taboo thing does the shaman need?
YOUR TRUTH
Do the Munuane still eat mainly meat, or did they swear to eat
only that which grows from the earth since their curse?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                       45
    OOKEMPAN                                                     FIRSTBORN
    Rank:     Formidable (1 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
                Large, green-skinned ogre
    Features:   Turtle shell on its back
                Iron cage on its shell
                Capture weaker creatures for meat and study
    Drives:     Eat the tender meat of young ones
                Gorge on Eintykara honey
                Defend with its invulnerable shell
    Tactics:    Trap victims in its cage
                Squeeze and crush with their size
    The Ookempan are large ogres who generally lead a simple life with strict
    traditions. When they come of age, they craft their first "life cage" which
    is then attached to the shells on their back. As they age, their shells grow
    around parts of the cage thereby anchoring it there for the rest of their life.
    Life cages serve the two major pursuits in Ookempan culture. The first is
    food. Any other non-Ookempan species, no matter if they are sentient or
    not, is viewed as potential food. There are elaborate cooking traditions in
    Ookempan society, and the young of other species are particularly sought
    after for their tender meat.
    The second major pursuit of these turtle-like people is that of knowledge
    and study. Any subject caught and placed in their life cage who is not eaten
    will be left there for study. They may see how long a subject can live
    without food or water, how they react to various plants or concoctions, and
    even perform elaborate autopsies. In this way, the Ookempans hope to
    master the power of life itself.
    Quest: For days, a Junglelander could be heard calling out hoarsely for
    help. A group followed the sound back to an Ookempan camp where
    several people were marked as a part of an upcoming feast. It seems the
    camp is now being decorated for a festival, so the meal must be soon. Can
    the people be saved without incurring the Ookempan's wrath?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Do the Ookempan have elaborate books of knowledge, or do
    they pass on what they learn through detailed stories with
    complex morals?
46  THE JUNGLELANDS | BASED ON SOUTH AMERICAN MYTHOLOGY
SACHAMAMA                                                       FIRSTBORN
Rank:            Epic (1 tick per harm; inflicts 5 harm)
                   Mother Snake of Earth
Features:          Scales of stone
                   Earth moving plate on the underbelly
                   Protect the earth
Drives:            Protect medicinal plants and ecosystem  on  its back
                   Keep the balance in all things
                   Magnetic pulls and pushes
Tactics:           Illusions and trickery
                   Brute force
Another deity in the flesh, Sachamama is the Mother Snake of the Earth.
Her great bulk may not rival Boiuna in size, but she is none-the-less large
enough to have a whole landscape and ecosystem growing on her back.
She is said to seek balance in the world and will coax rapid plant growth in
barren areas and plow down other areas thick with trees and underbrush.
Sachamama has a wide, bony plate on her underbelly near what might be
considered the base of her neck. She can push huge mounds of earth to the
side with this or raise up to drop it back down swiftly like a large hoe in a
field of crops.
This Mother Snake also has the ability to manipulate metal ores in the
ground or in weapons with great magnetic pulses. She can push weapons
to the side or pull armored folk up next to her great bulk. It may even be
these magnetic waves that induce the hazy illusions that she can project to
confound people.
Quest: A villager returned from a solitary hunting trip with an extremely
rare plant claiming that Sachamama herself gifted them with it. However,
tensions are now on the rise as many other people are claiming they should
get the herb for one reason or another. Some say that none should have
power of life or death with one of the Mother Snake's plants, and so the
plant should be destroyed. Who do you know that you think needs this
plant's healing ability more than any villagers here, and what are you
willing to do to get it?
YOUR TRUTH
What animal lives only on Sachamama's back, and why is it's
existence significant?
IRONSMITH: FLAVOR PACKS                                                        47
    YACUMAMA                                                        FIRSTBORN
    Rank:     Epic (1 tick per harm; inflicts 5 harm)
                       Mother Snake of Water
    Features:          Horned head and glowing eyes
                       Primordial power
                       Protect the waters
    Drives:            Feast on the unworthy
                       Increase her power
                       Shoot water sprays the size of cyclones
    Tactics:           Hypnotize with her eyes
                       Summon fog and whirlpools
    The third Mother Snake is Yacumama who holds power over the waters of
    the Junglelands. She prowls the oceans with her great bulk seeking to ever
    prove her power over all others. Where the other Mother Snakes have a
    benevolent or at least neutral side to their personality, Yacumama lords
    over her creation with pride and hubris.
    She has many powers at her disposal to destroy vessels in the open waters,
    but perhaps her favorite is to summon thick fog. As long as Huayramama
    is elsewhere, Yacumama can use the water temperature to reduce the wind
    to almost nothing so that the vessels barely move at all in the fog. Then,
    after this elaborate set-up,Yacumama begins to swirl the water beneath the
    vessels into a great whirlpool bringing all the occupants to a watery grave.
    Because of her aggressive nature, it is common practice to put criminals in
    smaller boats in front of trade vessels. They are told that if they can make
    the trade run unscathed byYacumama, they can have their freedom back at
    the end of the journey. Most criminals jump at this chance, but few live to
    see their freedom.
    Quest: You have been sentenced to the criminal's journey in escorting a
    trade vessel on one of the longest voyages along the western coast of the
    Junglelands. What crime are you accused of, and did you do it?
    YOUR TRUTH
    How does Yacumama patrol the inland waters? Does she send
    swarms of eels in her stead, can she shift down to a smaller size
    to travel through rivers, or does Boiuna act as her servant?
48  THE JUNGLELANDS | BASED ON SOUTH AMERICAN MYTHOLOGY
MARICOXI                                              JUNGLELANDER
Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2  harm)
            Muscular, ape-like body
Features:   Limited language
            Primitive and paranoid
            Exert dominance
Drives:     Protect family groups
            Fight to survive
            Wooden spears and rudimentary bows
Tactics:    Frenzied attacks
            Intimidation
Sometime long ago, other humans set foot in the Junglelands, but the
firstborn were much more active at that time along with even more
primordial beings. The humans had no chance to establish a true society
and only barely survived as prey for the dominant species. Generations of
this terrible existence led to the Maricoxi.
The Maricoxi are human in appearance, but they lack societal advances
such as detailed language or complex tools. They regressed back to a
previous form of life as they fought for survival. Their days were filled
with killing, eating, and hiding. They still have no agricultural skills and
depend completely on hunting and gathering.
While we have tried to welcome them into our settlements and help
integrate them into our culture, we have yet to establish meaningful
relations with the Maricoxi.   They are rightly suspicious of nearly
everyone, and attack first without waiting to see how dangerous the
situation might actually be. The best thing we have found is to respect
them and leave them be.
Quest: A group of Maricoxi arrived at a settlement wounded and near
death. The people of the settlement took them in and are attempting to heal
their wounds, but they are worried about what the Maricoxi are fleeing
from. What is hunting this group of Maricoxi, and why do you feel
compelled to hunt it? If you are successful, could this be the bridge
necessary to connect with the Maricoxi in a permanent way?
YOUR TRUTH
What skill have some of the Maricoxi mastered that is
unmatched in other societies?
