NEW FOES
The foes of the Grasslands tend toward animal hybrids more than the
standard fantasy creatures. They are almost more extraordinary than your
typical dragon or phoenix because of their hodgepodge of ordinary
attributes mixed together.
As always, these foes are not the exact same as their namesakes, but that
was the starting place for creating a foe that fit the Ironsworn system and
Grasslands setting. Additionally, where the majority of the assets take their
cues from Zulu culture, the foes presented here are from across Africa.
While my preference would have been to pull monsters from only Zulu
legends, I was unable to find enough in my surface-level research to give
the 20+ foes presented here. If you know of any more specific legends from
Zulu mythology that could be converted to foes, please let me know!
                                                    25
    CHIPEKWE                                                            ANIMAL
    Rank:      Formidable (1 progress per harm;  inflicts  3     harm)
                 Elephant-rhino cross
    Features:    Single, large horn
                 Thick hide, clawed feet
                 Hunt elephants and hippos
    Drives:      Drive out humans
                 Defend territory
                 Charge and gore
    Tactics:     Tear out throats
                 Stomp and crush
    The hippopotamus is a dangerous creature that we must be cautious of
    every time we approach water. Imagine our surprise when we found there
    was a creature that even the hippos feared. The chipekwe seems to be a
    cross between an elephant and a rhinoceros. It has the same thick, gray
    skin, a single horn on its stubby snout, and ears smaller and more rigid than
    an elephant that act as protection for the chipekwe's head.
    The chipekwe are apex hunters in the Grasslands. While lions or hyenas
    will occasionally try to take one down, they rarely succeed, and if they do,
    it is usually at the cost of several of their pack mates'lives. The chipekwe
    views lions or hyenas as simply a nuisance not worthy of being hunted.
    The main prey of chipekwe are elephants or hippos which they take down
    with a single charge and strong upward thrust of their horn. Once they
    mortally wound their prey in this fashion, they then use the claws at the
    edges of their elephant-like feet to rend great strips of flesh and muscle to
    feast on.
    We have found no reliable way to protect ourselves form these brutes.
    Quest:Arogue chipekwe has developed a taste for human flesh rather than
    pachyderms. It now seeks out villages to use as its food source. Who did
    it maim that you hold dear?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Do the chipekwe in your world have the normal, upward
    pointing horn on their snout, or do they have a downward
    curving horn that looks similar to an elephant's snout?
26                THE GRASSLANDS | BASED ON AFRICAN MYTHOLOGY
GBAHALI                                                         ANIMAL
Rank:         Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
                 Crocodile-velociraptor cross
Features:        Single claw on forelimbs
                 Bi-pedal walking, quadru-pedal running
                 Hunt for meat
Drives:          Be the alpha hunter
                 Sun bathe
                 Front claws pin victim to the ground
Tactics:         Serrated teeth
                 Stealthy pack hunting
The gbahali resemble an evolved form of crocodile with elongated jaws
full of deadly teeth. However, their back legs are much stronger and longer
enabling them to walk using only their hind legs. Their front legs are also
longer than a normal crocs and end with a single thick claw. The gbahali
can go down on all fours and use a loping stride to achieve great speeds for
short distances.
Unfortunately, they are also good swimmers. Their ridged backs and thick
tail allow them to knife through the water much as a regular crocodile as
long as they keep their legs tucked tightly to their body. They typically
only hunt within a few hours walking distance of water sources because
they also enjoy sunbathing on the rocks beside water.
Quest: Gbahali eggs are a prized delicacy served only to those of the
highest social status. Warriors sent to obtain such eggs often return
maimed if they return at all. However, it is a mark of pride to have
provided such a dish to an overseer or shaman. A clutch of eggs has been
discovered downriver, and an egg-gathering group of warriors has been
assembled. The person who is requesting these eggs wronged you in some
way. How? Why would receiving these eggs be an honor that they are
unworthy of?
YOUR TRUTH
Are gbahali bodies narrow for better speed when running, or
are they built more like warthogs for toughness and
endurance?
                                                   27
    IMPUNDULU                                                      ANIMAL
    Rank:     Troublesome (3 progress per harm; inflicts 1 harm)
                Over-sized beak
    Features:   White to yellow crests with red-feathered wings
                Lightning writhing across its body
                Follow lightning storms
    Drives:     Be struck by lightning
                Guard those with mystic power over lightning
                Attract lightning strikes
    Tactics:    Bury itself in the ground to hide
                Speed strikes with lightning laced beak
    Impundulu, or lightning birds as they are commonly called, are about the
    size of a peacock. The stalks of their feathers are infused with some form
    of ultra-light metal that allows them to act as a Faraday cage for the birds.
    Small jolts of electricity are constantly pulsing over their bodies which we
    believe are used primarily as an energy source for the birds.
    Perhaps due to their gradual consumption of this energy, the birds are
    constantly seeking out storms where they use their ability to attract bolts of
    lightning to themselves in order to replenish their own electricity. Some
    say that the lightning birds can even summon lightning with their wings.
    If you find lightning birds staying away from a nearby storm, be very
    careful. That usually means the birds are in the service of a mystic who can
    wield and harness the power of lightning. Not only will the birds
    themselves be more aggressive, their master is often nearby and usually
    will go to great lengths to not be interrupted in their work.
    Quest: One flock of impundulu have learned to work together to channel
    thick lightning strikes to specific spots on the ground. Using this ability as
    a kind of drill, they have left shallow tunnels pockmarked across the area.
    What is it that the flock is looking for, and why would it better if they didn't
    find it?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Do the impundulu in your world truly have the ability to
    summon lightning with their wings? If so, give this foe the
    rank of Dangerous instead of Troublesome.
28               THE GRASSLANDS | BASED ON AFRICAN MYTHOLOGY
INKANYAMBA                                                            ANIMAL
Rank:       Troublesome (3 progress per harm;  inflicts  1  harm)
               Large, carnivorous eel
Features:      Horse-shaped head
               Grow wings to mate
               Annual mating in tornadoes
Drives:        Live in waterfalls
               Gorge on meat
               Savage bites
Tactics:       Swift headbutt
               Constrict victims
At first glance, the inkanyamba appear to a spear-sized eel except for their
horse-like head plated with thick bone. They live in and around waterfalls
where they prey on any fish falling over the falls. They can achieve swift
enough speeds that they can swim up the waterfall itself for short distances.
The unusual aspect of the inkanyamba comes in the summer months when
they begin to grow wings. As they do so, they swim higher and higher
through the waterfalls and burst out the edges into the air free-falling back
down to the pool below until they finally are able to take full flight. At this
point, they congregate near storm systems looking for tornadoes to form
where they perform a dangerous mating ritual as they twirl inside the
funnel clouds.
We have learned to recognize the sound of the inkanyamba head hitting our
canoes in the water. It only takes a few strikes before they are able to crack
our canoes, so once we hear and feel the first impact, there are only seconds
to either make it to the shore or violently dissuade further attack.
Quest: The force of a nearby waterfall has been eating away at the rock
below it for time immemorial, and a reckless youth dared to swim beneath
the falls discovered not only a school of inkanyamba but a narrow opening
that appears to lead to a cave system behind the falls. Why do you think
this cave system was not made naturally, and what do you hope to find
within it?
YOUR TRUTH
What other activity do the inkanyamba participate in each
season while they have their wings?
                                                      29
    KONGAMATO                                                       ANIMAL
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts  2  harm)
                Flying pterosaur with leathery skin
    Features:   Fish-like tail with red feathers
                Sharp beak on a horned head
                Glide on warm currents
    Drives:     Protect the nest
                Hunt small game
                Flyby attack with beak
    Tactics:    Retreat if necessary
                Claw with back feet
    The kongamato are the great scavengers of the skies but will also hunt
    small game that presents itself such as unprotected fawns or cubs. They
    use their toothy beak to grind up anything from fresh kills to rigid and dried
    husks left from a weeks old kill. They will often fly over battles knowing
    that food will be available shortly.
    While not as aggressive as many species found in the Grasslands, these
    creatures are nonetheless dangerous if provoked or if they find you
    between them and their food. We have found that the best way to defeat
    the kongamato is to tear their leathery wings and force them to the ground
    where they are far less mobile. Melee weapons are usually deflected by
    their bony beaks, so a sling, spear, or bow are far better for protecting
    yourself during an encounter.
    Quest: A group of kongamato attacked a village in a large group and made
    off with an infant that had been set down so the parents could help fight off
    the creatures. This was unusual because kongamato are usually solitary
    creatures, don't often attack humans, and rarely take prey back to their nest
    without killing it first. The infant was taken alive and has only a slim
    chance of being found in time for a rescue. Whose child was taken, and
    what connection do you have to them?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Are kongamato covered in red feathers or is it only their tail
    that is feathered?
    What do the kongamato use their tails for?
30               THE GRASSLANDS | BASED ON AFRICAN MYTHOLOGY
UFITI                                                                ANIMAL
Rank:      Formidable (1 progress per harm;      inflicts  3  harm)
             Large, chimp-gorilla cross
Features:    Highly intelligent
             Silvery back, barrel chest
             Be the tribe alpha
Drives:      Fight for a mate
             Inflict harm
             Crushing smash
Tactics:     Rending bite
             Overpower and intimidate
The ufiti are apes of near human level intelligence that have a deeply
savage streak. They rarely exhibit fear and never back down from a
challenge, particularly in their own territory.
We are not sure how these apes acquired such a higher level of intelligence
than their gorilla cousins, but they use their smarts to create rudimentary
tools and shelters. Their social hierarchy and communication is also
enhanced by their expanded sense of self-awareness and ability to think in
terms of future outcomes.
Along with their strength and intelligence, the ufiti can also be swift and
stealthy in their natural forest habitats. When we first encountered the ufiti,
several attacked and killed the Grasslanders on the edge of the group
before we could even spot them. From attacks like these, they gained the
nickname of ghost apes.
Quest: A veritable strike force of ufiti have been strategically attacking
settlements seemingly under the direction of one extremely large ape who
presides over the attack from afar. What is the goal of these attacks, and
how can they be stopped?
YOUR TRUTH
Do the ufiti have silver backs or is all their fur silver?
Are ghost apes particularly stealthy ufiti or are they a whole
separate species with their own features and abilities?
                                                      31
    GROOTSLANG                                                 BEAST
    Rank:          Epic (1 tick per harm; inflicts 5 harm)
                     Giant snake with elephant head
    Features:        Ivory tusks form the teeth
                     Ears act as shields
                     Find and hoard diamonds
    Drives:          Lust for cruelty
                     Rule the warm waters
                     Crush ships
    Tactics:         Impale on tusk-teeth
                     Drag to the depths
    We don't know how many grootslang there are in the Grasslands. There
    could be only one as all the descriptions including scars seem to line up
    between all the sightings. Encounters with grootslang also tend to occur
    near one particularly deep lake known as the Wonder Hole.
    The Wonder Hole is a lake so wide that we attempt traversing it with boats
    rather than take the several days necessary to go around it. Legend says
    that a vessel on one such journey was carrying a load of rare gemstones
    from the north mountains and was hoping to use the lake and its exiting
    river to deliver the goods south when it was attacked by a grootslang. The
    ship is said to be sunk in the direct center of the lake, but we have yet to
    fashion an anchor with a long enough rope to properly gauge the depth of
    the lake. It may be as deep as a mountain is tall.
    With the grootslang nearby, why do we continue to cross theWonder Hole?
    Raiders often attack those who attempt to circumnavigate the great lake,
    and many believe the grootslang can be dissuaded from attacking by
    tossing a diamond overboard as a sacrifice.
    Quest:Agreat warrior claims to have defeated a grootslang in battle using
    an enchanted spear and bears a huge tusk as evidence, but the body of the
    creature cannot be found at the site of the battle. The warrior is seeking a
    group of brave souls to go on an expedition to find the remains of this
    creature knowing that each part of the carcass could be valuable to mystics
    and crafters.
    YOUR TRUTH
    Exactly how big is a grootslang?
    If there is more than one, where else can they be found?
32                    THE GRASSLANDS | BASED ON AFRICAN MYTHOLOGY
KHODUMODUMO                                                            BEAST
Rank:     Extreme (2 ticks per harm; inflicts   4  harm)
            House-sized frog
Features:   Razor tongue
            Obese and sickly green
            Eat live victims
Drives:     Croak loudly
            Wallow in mud
            Swallow victims whole
Tactics:    Slice with multiple tongues
            Hop and crush
Akhodumodumo is a frightening, unstoppable force of nature. If you hear
their deep, guttural croaking, run. Run as fast and as far as your legs will
take you if you value your life at all. These huge, armored frogs are coated
with a slimy layer of poisonous mucus and are not to be trifled with.
These creatures are large enough that they can swallow a horse whole and
frequently do. They can lash out with their multiple tongues and pull their
victims into their mouths with little trouble.
Our one advantage against these behemoths is that they are slow and must
stay near a source of water deep enough to submerge into. While they can
jump long distances and crush trees with their bulk, they always take the
easiest available food.
Quest: A khodumodumo has expanded its territory and is now close to the
settlement of Wanru. A group of hunters is setting out to eliminate this new
threat, but they are unaware of an even greater menace. What dangerous
being or event forced the khodumodumo to move its own territory?
YOUR TRUTH
Amuch smaller but still dangerous species has a symbiotic
relationship with the khodumodumo. What is this species, and
why are they dangerous?
                                                   33
    MOKELE MBEMBE                                              BEAST
    Rank:       Extreme (2 ticks per harm; inflicts  4  harm)
                  Long-necked apatosaurus
    Features:     Thick, bluish-gray hide
                  Armored spinal plates
                  Eat from tall trees
    Drives:       Roam the riverbanks
                  Cool off in lakes
                  Crush with feet
    Tactics:      Tail swat
                  Roll over victims
    Usually a gentle giant, the mokele mbembe are a large herbivore reptile
    species that travel in family pods with their young. They spend much of
    their time in the water but traverse the edges of lakes and rivers by day for
    their preferred meal: the white blossomed liana vine with its milky sap and
    small fruit similar to apples.
    While normally not aggressive, these creatures are easily startled and
    dangerous by their sheer size. With underbellies that reach the height of an
    elephant's head, the creatures can capsize small water vessels when they
    submerge suddenly out of fear.
    On land, they are equally dangerous when provoked as they lash out with
    their whip-like tails that produce loud cracks of thunder. If a predator
    moves too close, they have even been known to fall directly on top of their
    attacker and roll their bulk over the predator until they are little more than
    paste on the ground.
    We have learned to respect the territory of the mokele mbembe and not
    make any sudden movements around them. They will generally tolerate us
    when we leave them be.
    Quest: During mating season, the mokele mbembe males will whip their
    tails back and forth producing thunderous cracks trying to impress a
    female. This season, several pods all met in the same spot on the river near
    the settlement of Odanrixis, and the noise of their mating rituals has
    started several stampedes of the few livestock the settlement has. How can
    this situation be resolved peacefully so that the village won't lose any more
    livestock?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Some claim the mokele mbeme have a single horn. Do they?
34                 THE GRASSLANDS | BASED ON AFRICAN MYTHOLOGY
NINKI      NANKA                                                        BEAST
Rank:      Formidable (1 progress per harm;       inflicts  3  harm)
             Long-necked dragon or wyrm
Features:    Horse head with horns
             Four legs with claws
             Bask in the swamp
Drives:      Hunt young, tender meat
             Collect bones
             Pin with their horns
Tactics:     Poisonous bite
             Hide in swamp water
The ninki nanka resemble the mokele mbembe in some ways. They are
only slightly smaller in size, and both have long necks. However, the
similarities end there. The ninki nanka have rough and mottled skin rather
than the smooth skin of the mokele mbembe. They are also carnivorous
and have the natural weaponry to be crafty hunters despite their bulk.
Their skin has markings similar to a giraffe that allows them to hide well
among the twisted trees of a swamp. They are known to stay frozen in
place for hours waiting for prey to come close enough for them to attack,
and start most attacks with a poisonous bite followed by a headbutt meant
to stun and trap their prey with their oddly shaped horns.
For some reason unknown to us, the ninki nanka collect the bones of their
kills and will sleep on mounds of them. It may be that the creatures use the
bones simply to create a solid surface to sleep on in the muddy swamps, or
it could be a show of their prowess as a hunter.
Quest: A ninki nanka is thought to be responsible for a group of missing
adolescents who went out foraging. If the youth have any chance, a rescue
mission must be mounted immediately.
YOUR TRUTH
The ninki nanka horns are used in a sacred ceremony. What is
this ceremony, and how does it relate to the swamplands?
                                                    35
    NYUVWIRA                                               BEAST
    Rank:     Extreme (2 ticks per harm; inflicts 4 harm)
                     Eight-headed underground snake
    Features:        Emits magnetic pulses
                     Heads writhing to burrow tunnels
                     Find precious ores
    Drives:          Fight off humans
                     Hunt large game
                     Undermine and engulf
    Tactics:         Toxic skin
                     Rapid multi-attacks with heads
    The nyuvwira are extremely dangerous foes. These eight-headed serpents
    can tunnel underground almost as quickly as they can slither atop it. Each
    head moves perfectly in tandem with the others to scoop out large chunks
    of earth and pull it behind the creature. We believe the the creature is
    seeking out metals and ores as it digs underground, but it took us a while
    to realize this.
    When we first encountered a nyuvwira, we thought the shaky movements
    of warriors' swords and axes were byproducts of facing an unfamiliar
    opponent, but we soon discovered that the beast itself can send out wide
    pulses that draw metals to itself. If you are right next to a nyuvwira when
    it pulses like this, your sword may be temporarily stuck to the creature's
    hide. In the meantime, it's eight heads have all taken a bite out of you. If
    you're lucky enough to survive that onslaught, the toxins from the
    nyuvwira's skin has likely made contact with you and definitely with your
    weapon. You may run away and live for a time, but the poison will get you
    in the end without immediate assistance.
    We don't know why, but the nyuvwira seem to have a particular hatred for
    humans. Either we are too different from what they are used to seeing, or
    we were not the first humans to walk these lands giving the creatures an
    instinctual response of loathing to us.
    Quest: A mine has been infested with nyuvwira spawn, and while still in
    their youth, the creatures are dangerous. What treasure did the miners
    think they had discovered that is causing them to be unwilling to abandon
    this place to the nyuvwira?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Do the nyuvwira eat the metals they find?         If not, what purpose
    does the ore serve for them?
36                    THE GRASSLANDS | BASED ON AFRICAN MYTHOLOGY
BULGU                                                            FIRSTBORN
Rank:     Formidable (1 progress per harm; inflicts 3 harm)
            Four eyes in an axe-shaped head
Features:   Thick arms with no fingers that resemble axe handles
            Plate-like carapace on their backs
            Eat humans
Drives:     Stalk the rivers
            Protect their territory
            Slashing headbutts
Tactics:    Club with their arms
            Hunt by smell and sound
At first we thought the bulgu were nothing more than monsters. They
resemble ogres or trolls in stature but are much more grotesque, and we did
not hear them speak for years. They hunted us, so we hunted them.
Once we captured one alive, we heard their speech, a series of clicks,
grunts, guttural noises, and ill-sounding words, and then we knew it must
be sapient. It then called out to its brethren which led to another attack
where it was freed. Many brave Grasslanders were lost that day.
As far as we can tell, the bulgu typically live on or near rivers. Perhaps it's
merely a water source or perhaps they need water in a much more
amphibious way. We just don't know. We've never been able to find a full
settlement of bulgu, but may the ancestors protect us if we do.
Quest: A bulgu has approached the settlement of Nkurenna roughly
speaking the Grasslander language. It seeks an end to the expansion of the
settlement towards the river and threatens reprisal if ignored. This could
be a chance to learn about bulgu culture if a peace could be brokered, but
how do you negotiate with such aggressive beings?
YOUR TRUTH
What purpose do the four eyes serve? Do they allow the bulgu
to triangulate distances giving superior accuracy with their
charges and strikes?
Are all four eyes facing the same direction, or are they facing
the four different directions?
                                                      37
    ELOKO                                                        FIRSTBORN
    Rank:      Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
                 Vile, cannibalistic dwarf
    Features:    Grassy beard and leafy clothes
                 Carries an enchanted bell
                 Stalk the rain forest
    Drives:      Eat livers
                 Find abandoned spouses to seduce and consume
                 Use the bell to attract humans
    Tactics:     Spread gangrenous disease
                 Stab with long knives
    The eloko are beings closely tied to the earth of the Grasslands itself. They
    walk the waterways of the deep forests and have the ability to grow plants
    as part of their own bodies.
    They also possess strange mystical abilities exemplified by the bell that
    each one carries. Every bell is unique, but they are all made out of an
    unknown type of wood that resonates deeply when struck. Moreover,
    depending on the specific tone they produce with the bell, different effects
    can be observed. The most common effect is that of holding a Grasslander
    enthralled. The eloko use this ability to catch us off guard and steal our
    mates that they then seduce and use for their own vile purposes before
    eating out their insides.
    Eloko are also known to spread disease through their touch. Whether a
    gangrene of the skin or a blight on our crops, they can sicken anything they
    come in contact with.
    If we are careful and stuff our ears with wool when an eloko is nearby, they
    can be defeated in battle like any other, but the most dangerous part is when
    they first make their appearance known by ensorcelling one of us.
    Quest: In the settlement of Oputavi, those who are widowed will often
    "take the walk of bells" out into the forest in essence sacrificing themselves
    to the eloko who live there. How did such a tradition start, and why is the
    gruesome practice still observed?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Some say that eloko can meld into trees. Is this true?
38                THE GRASSLANDS | BASED ON AFRICAN MYTHOLOGY
POPOBAWA                                                            FIRSTBORN
Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm;  inflicts 2 harm)
            One-eyed bat people
Features:   Can shapechange to be more    human-like
            Fanged maws
            Assault other firstborn
Drives:     Claim territory
            Inspire fear
            Hunt at night
Tactics:    Enslave others
            Bite and claw
The popobawa are generally a war-like people who believe that perpetual
expansion is their right by destiny and power. They value a ritualistic
version of hunting and have a strange sense of a warrior's honor that can
tolerate deceit and ill behavior as long as it is not openly seen.
Might makes right in their tribes, and they even war with each other which
has helped us to stay safer when near them. But you are never truly safe
when near the popobawa. They almost always attack at night and will
happily rush in to take prisoners and swiftly retreat night after night to
wear down an enemy force by attrition.
Their skin is usually some shade of red, and their eye is large and bulbous.
These things along with their ability to shapechange and fly have led many
to believe that the popobawa are really a species of demons that decided to
live on the surface of this mortal realm rather than in the bowels and
abandoned portions of the next realm.
Quest: An unexpected nighttime assault by popobawa has led to the
capture of several citizens of the settlement Karikos. They had no idea they
were near popobawa territory and are worried about further attacks if they
provoke the bat people by sending out a rescue party. Can the villagers be
saved without escalating the situation? Who do you know that is desperate
to lead the rescue mission, and why don't you trust them?
YOUR TRUTH
Are the popobawa actually firstborn of the Grasslands, or are
they sentient horrors that have invaded from another realm?
                                                    39
    UMUTWA                                                            FIRSTBORN
    Rank:        Troublesome (3 progress per harm;       inflicts  1  harm)
                      Tiny humanoids
    Features:         Riding ants to battle
                      Zealously follow tribal mystic
                      Gain flattery and respect
    Drives:           Hunt in warrior packs
                      Collect crops left at crossroads
                      Potent poisoned arrows
    Tactics:          Swarm with vine-like ropes
                      Use large animals to distract
    In the Old World, we had a ritual of placing small quantities of food at
    significant crossroads as a sacrifice to our ancestors. Upon arriving at the
    Grasslands, we continued this tradition but found that the sacrifices were
    taken not by our ancestral spirits but by the umutwa.
    The umutwa are a folk not more than the height of a thumb, but they have
    the courage, bravery, and perhaps bluster, of those many times their size.
    They breed a multitude of large insects to serve them as mounts, beasts of
    burden, and livestock. They are most known for the iridescent green beetle
    that they harvest their poisons from and the bright red fire ants that they
    ride into battle.
    While beings this small may sound like they are not a threat, we have found
    respect and caution the watch words for dealing with the umutwa. If they
    attack with a full force, they are more than a match for a skilled
    Grasslander. There are simply too many of them, and we are quickly
    overwhelmed.
    One further word of caution: never speak of their small stature while in
    their presence. Trust me.
    Quest: A mystic would like a sample of the umutwa's beetle poison, but
    understandably, they are reluctant to share. Why is having a sample so
    important, and in what way do you feel this encounter would also benefit
    the umutwa?
    YOUR TRUTH
    What do the umutwa legends of creation say about the
    formation of the Grasslands?
40                     THE GRASSLANDS | BASED ON AFRICAN MYTHOLOGY
ADZE                                                           HORROR
Rank:      Troublesome (3 progress per harm; inflicts 1 harm)
             Vampiric firefly
Features:    Can turn ethereal
             Shapeshift to humanoid
             Possess people to turn them into witches
Drives:      Drain a victim's blood
             Create spawn inside a victim's body
             Stay small and bite
Tactics:     Possess a victim
             Pass on diseases
While the adze can present themselves as a humanoid, do not be fooled.
They are demons or evil spirits who know nothing of the mortal existence.
They live only to drain others of life and then procreate.
It is said that the flashing of an adze firefly puts Grasslanders in a dazed
state so that the adze can land and feed more easily. After slaking their
blood thirst, they will then push eggs beneath the surface of their victims
skin which over time swell and burst forth in their hatching. This is not
always fatal to the victim, but leaves them horrifically scarred or maimed.
Another way the adze secure the means to procreate is by enhancing a
victims connection to evil spirits. This connection usually comes with an
irresistible power that warps the mind of the user and turns them into a
witch. Those Grasslanders who have the powers of a witch are often
willing to use those powers to help the adze find more victims in return for
the promise of even more power.
Quest: During the summer months, fireflies flash a bioluminescent green to
the delight of children across the Grasslands. But near the village of
Tsumegwa, red lights have been seen flashing in the forest signaling an
infestation of adze. The last person to leave Tsumegwa said that the
remaining residents were boarding up their huts as airtight as they could
in hopes of keeping the adze at bay, but that can only be a temporary
solution. Who do you know that is trapped in Tsumegwa, and what do you
suspect is behind the adze infestation?
YOUR TRUTH
The sangoma claim a specific sigil will ward off the adze.     What
does this symbol represent, and what are its origins?
                                                   41
    CHEMOSIT                                                              HORROR
    Rank:     Dangerous (2 progress per harm;         inflicts  2  harm)
                      Half bird, half human demon
    Features:         One leg, nine buttocks
                      Mouth shines red
                      Hunt flesh of children
    Drives:           Inspire fear
                      Curse the living
                      Sing a song to lure in victim
    Tactics:          Stab with spear-like walking   stick
                      Bite
    In the Old World, we would sing our children to sleep. Not any more. The
    demonic chemosit is truly horrific because it targets our most vulnerable,
    our children, by singing playful tunes in an attempt to lure children out.
    Many of the first children we lost thought they were going to a dance
    because they heard the happy music and saw the red glow from the
    creature's mouth that they assumed was a fire. The parents who lost their
    children this way still will not attend bonfire festivals as the pain weighs on
    them too heavily.
    Chemosits have a vaguely human face except for their large, triangular
    mouth that resembles a beak. Their torsos are often covered in a dark black
    fur while their very human-like arms are bare.
    We thought that the fact that they have only one bird-like leg would slow
    them down and make them more vulnerable, but alas, it is not so. They
    have the ability to turn into a thick vapor and dissipate to escape attacks.
    While the process is a bit slow and can be interrupted, it is still rare that we
    are able to kill one of these fiends.
    Quest: Three children were found missing this morning and there are
    tracks with a single large bird foot leading out of town. No one knows
    where the chemosit make their home or even if they have one, but time is
    short if the children are to saved. Who do you know that may have the
    means to locate this demon?
    YOUR TRUTH
    How are chemosit created? Is it from the death of a
    particularly corrupt Grasslander? Are they beings from
    another existence? What sort of vulnerability does this
    creation process give the chemosit?
42                     THE GRASSLANDS | BASED ON AFRICAN MYTHOLOGY
NKALA                                                              HORROR
Rank:         Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts 2 harm)
                Giant spectral crab
Features:       Diameter of a human's height
                Hippo-like head on each end
                Eat shadows of people
Drives:         Serve sorcerer or witch
                Follow whistling or high-pitched noises
                Devour shadow
Tactics:        Psychic strikes of fear
                Pincer attacks
Nkala appear to be flat, brown crabs with a hard shell, but they have a head
on either end of their body like the flattened head of a hippopotamus. In
all honesty, we thought they were a laughable creature when we first
encountered them. Little did we know that these are not beasts or animals
but some form of horror empowered by sinister magic. And do not scream
around these creatures, for they are drawn to the sound.
While the crab-like pincers and hippo-like tusks are deadly physical
weapons, the nkala's most dangerous aspects are those connected to their
nature as a horror. Firstly, the nkala have an ability to instill immediate and
powerful fear in a victim. Like a lance through the brain, the fear can
produce physical harm as the heart and blood vessels overload and also
usually cause the victim to freeze in place unable to think clearly enough
to run away.
Secondly, the nkala can eat a person's shadow. This again may not sound
dangerous, but the consequences of not having a shadow are equally
deadly. Over time, a person who has lost their shadow will waste away.
They can see into a realm of death super-imposed onto our world and spend
more and more time there. Without the shadow's ability to cast darkness
out of the body, that darkness builds up and consumes the victim.
Quest: A person has lost their shadow and fears the certain death they
know is coming for them in the weeks ahead. Apowerful mystic claims that
they can create a new shadow for the person, but need a rare artifact.
What does the mystic need? Who is the person that lost their shadow, and
how do you know them?
YOUR TRUTH
Do nkala stay near sources of water, or are they land-dwelling?
                                                      43
    TOKOLOSHE                                                            HORROR
    Rank:          Troublesome (3 progress per harm; inflicts  1  harm)
                     Imp-like spirit
    Features:        Summoned by corrupted shaman
                     Covered in hair
                     Avoid holy sites
    Drives:          Serve the shaman
                     Cause mischief
                     Swallow a stone of invisibility
    Tactics:         Bite off toes
                     Present frightening visage
    While some horrors are native to the Grasslands, the tokoloshe are spirits
    of our own making. Corrupted shaman or sangoma summoned these hairy
    spiritual imps as a means of taking revenge which often came in the form
    of killing a person in their sleep. Due to the small stature of the tokoloshe,
    we have found that sleeping raised off the floor of our rondavels is key to
    staying safe.
    The tokoloshe can kill by stealing the breath directly from the lungs of a
    person. After killing a victim, the tokoloshe will desecrate the body by
    eating the toes off the person. If they can't kill someone outright, they are
    content to torment the person with madness-inducing dreams.
    Hunting tokoloshe is difficult because they are small but also because they
    have a supply of magic stones they keep in a bag made of flesh. When they
    swallow one of these stones, they became nearly invisible for a short period
    of time. No one knows what these stones are or where they come from, but
    they frustrate our ability to keep our people safe.
    Quest: An explorer claims to have found a deep cave system where a large
    gathering of tokoloshe harvest their invisibility stones. They are seeking
    someone to help them sneak into the cave and steal some stones for
    themselves. What other deadly being is said to live in this cave system, and
    why would you still be willing to risk joining this task?
    YOUR TRUTH
    Once a tokoloshe is created by a shaman, they continue to exist
    even after released from service. What strange change do the
    tokoloshe undergo once they are released by the shaman that
    makes them even more dangerous?
44                    THE GRASSLANDS | BASED ON AFRICAN MYTHOLOGY
WITCH      DOCTOR                                             GRASSLANDER
Rank:      Dangerous (2 progress per harm; inflicts        2  harm)
             Dark wooden masks
Features:    Master of alchemy
             Chants and incense
             Hunt albino bones
Drives:      Connect with spiritual realm
             Pursue corrupted magics and power
             Use voodoo dolls
Tactics:     Dismembering slash
             Transmit psychological afflictions
With great power comes great responsibility, and there are times when our
beloved sangoma, healers, shaman, or mystics go mad with power. They
push their inner powers further than their mind or spirit can fully control.
Once under the delusion of their own grandeur, they seek out ever more
power, but that power always comes at the price of lives.
To fuel their corrupted magics, witch doctors usually hunt those
Grasslanders who happen to have albinism. They grind the bones into a
fine powder that can be used for poultices, potions, or other rituals imbued
with power. Because of this specific need, witch doctors often carry stout
scythes they use to dismember their victims. They may often cut off an arm
or leg and immediately begin the cleaning the grinding process on those
bones while the victim bleeds out from their injuries.
Witch doctors also know the deeper magics involved in the flesh and bone
of humans. Never give a lock of hair, knocked out tooth, or even a clipping
from your nails to anyone. Burn anything that is separated from your body
immediately lest it fall into the hands of a witch doctor who can bind it to
a doll-like effigy giving them power over you.
Quest: A villager lies sick, inflicted with an unknown disease, when the
villager's former lover admits to giving a lock of hair to a witch doctor to
enact vengeance on the person for the perceived romantic slights.
Knowing a witch doctor is responsibility, the overseer believes the disease
can be reversed. What makes you think you know the identity of this witch
doctor? What harm did they previously bring upon you and yours?
YOUR TRUTH
What powers are embedded in the wooden masks of witch
doctors? Is this ability connected to the elves? If so, how?
